<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</h2>
			<p>These were eventful days in Grange Lane, when gossip was not nearly rapid enough to follow the march of events. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth went to lunch with his family, the two sisters kept together in the drawing-room, which seemed again reconsecrated to the purposes of life. Lucy had not much inclination just at that moment to move out of her chair; she was not sociable, to tell the truth, nor disposed to talk even about the new prospects which were brightening over both. She even took out her needlework, to the disgust of her sister. “When there are so many things to talk about, and so much to be considered,” Miss Wodehouse said, with a little indignation; and wondered within herself whether Lucy was really insensible to “what had happened,” or whether the sense of duty was strong upon her little sister even in the height of her happiness. A woman of greater experience or discrimination might have perceived that Lucy had retired into that sacred silence, sweetest of all youthful privileges, in which she could dream over to herself the wonderful hour which had just come to an end, and the fair future of which it was the gateway. As for Miss Wodehouse herself, she was in a flutter, and could not get over the sense of haste and confusion which this last new incident had brought upon her. Things were going too fast around her, and the timid woman was out of breath. Lucy’s composure at such a moment, and, above all, the production of her needlework, was beyond the comprehension of the elder sister.</p>
			<p>“My dear,” said Miss Wodehouse, with an effort, “I don’t doubt that these poor people are badly off, and I am sure it is very good of you to work for them; but if you will only think how many things there are to do! My darling, I am afraid you will have to⁠—to make your own dresses in future, which is what I never thought to see,” she said, putting her handkerchief to her eyes; “and we have not had any talk about anything, Lucy, and there are so many things to think of!” Miss Wodehouse, who was moving about the room as she spoke, began to lift her own books and special property off the centre table. The books were principally ancient Annuals in pretty bindings, which no representation on Lucy’s part could induce her to think out of date; and among her other possessions was a little desk in Indian mosaic, of ivory, which had been an institution in the house from Lucy’s earliest recollection. “And these are yours, Lucy dear,” said Miss Wodehouse, standing up on a chair to take down from the wall two little pictures which hung side by side. They were copies both, and neither of great value; one representing the San Sisto Madonna, and the other a sweet <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes, whom Lucy had in her earlier days taken to her heart. Lucy’s slumbering attention was roused by this sacrilegious act. She gave a little scream, and dropped her work out of her hands.</p>
			<p>“What do I mean?” said Miss Wodehouse; “indeed, Lucy dear, we must look it in the face. It is not our drawing-room any longer, you know.” Here she made a pause, and sighed; but somehow a vision of the other drawing-room which was awaiting her in the new rectory, made the prospect less doleful than it might have been. She cleared up in a surprising way as she turned to look at her own property on the table. “My cousin Jack gave me this,” said the gentle woman, brushing a little dust off her pretty desk. “When it came first, there was nothing like it in Carlingford, for that was before Colonel Chiley and those other Indian people had settled here. Jack was rather fond of me in those days, you know, though I never cared for him,” the elder sister continued, with a smile. “Poor fellow! they said he was not very happy when he married.” Though this was rather a sad fact, Miss Wodehouse announced it not without a certain gentle satisfaction. “And, Lucy dear, it is our duty to put aside our own things; they were all presents, you know,” she said, standing up on the chair again to reach down the <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes, which, ever since Lucy had been confirmed, had hung opposite to her on the wall.</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t, don’t!” cried Lucy. In that little bit of time, not more than five minutes as it appeared, the familiar room, which had just heard the romance of her youth, had come to have a dismantled and desolate look. The agent of this destruction, who saw in her mind’s eye a new scene, altogether surpassing the old, looked complacently upon her work, and piled the abstracted articles on the top of each other, with a pleasant sense of property.</p>
			<p>“And your little chair and worktable are yours,” said Miss Wodehouse; “they were always considered yours. You worked the chair yourself, though perhaps Miss Gibbons helped you a little; and the table you know, was sent home the day you were eighteen. It was⁠—a present, you remember. Don’t cry, my darling, don’t cry; oh, I am sure I did not mean anything!” cried Miss Wodehouse, putting down the <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes and flying to her sister, about whom she threw her arms. “My hands are all dusty, dear,” said the repentant woman; “but you know, Lucy, we must look it in the face, for it is not our drawing-room now. Tom may come in any day and say⁠—oh, dear, dear, here is someone coming upstairs!”</p>
			<p>Lucy extricated herself from her sister’s arms when she heard footsteps outside. “If it is anybody who has a right to come, I suppose we are able to receive them,” she said, and sat erect over her needlework, with a changed countenance, not condescending so much as to look towards the door.</p>
			<p>“But what if it should be Tom? Oh, Lucy dear, don’t be uncivil to him,” said the elder sister. Miss Wodehouse even made a furtive attempt to replace the things, in which she was indignantly stopped by Lucy. “But, my dear, perhaps it is Tom,” said the alarmed woman, and sank trembling into a chair against the <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes, which had just been deposited there.</p>
			<p>“It does not matter who it is,” said Lucy, with dignity. For her own part, she felt too much aggrieved to mention his name⁠—aggrieved by her own ignorance, by the deception that had been practised upon her, by the character of the man whom she was obliged to call her brother, and chiefly by his existence, which was the principal grievance of all. Lucy’s brief life had been embellished, almost ever since she had been capable of independent action, by deeds and thoughts of mercy. With her whole heart she was a disciple of Him who came to seek the lost; notwithstanding, a natural human sentiment in her heart protested against the existence of this man, who had brought shame and distress into the family without any act of theirs, and who injured everybody he came in contact with. When the thought of Rosa Elsworthy occurred to her, a burning blush came upon Lucy’s cheek⁠—why were such men permitted in God’s world? To be sure, when she came to be aware of what she was thinking, Lucy felt guilty, and called herself a Pharisee, and said a prayer in her heart for the man who had upset all her cherished ideas of her family and home; but, after all, <em>that</em> was an afterthought, and did not alter her instinctive sense of repulsion and indignation. All this swept rapidly through her mind while she sat awaiting the entrance of the person or persons who were approaching the door. “If it is the⁠—owner of the house, it will be best to tell him what things you mean to remove,” said Lucy; and before Miss Wodehouse could answer, the door was opened. They started, however, to perceive not Wodehouse, but a personage of very different appearance, who came in with an easy air of polite apology, and looked at them with eyes which recalled to Lucy the eyes which had been gazing into her own scarcely an hour ago. “Pardon me,” said this unlooked-for visitor; “your brother, Miss Wodehouse, finds some difficulty in explaining himself to relations from whom he has been separated so long. Not to interfere with family privacy, will you let me assist at the conference?” said Jack Wentworth. “My brother, I understand, is a friend of yours, and your brother⁠—is a⁠—hem⁠—friend of mine,” the diplomatist added, scarcely able to avoid making a wry face over the statement. Wodehouse came in behind, looking an inch or two taller for that acknowledgment, and sat down, confronting his sisters, who were standing on the defensive. The heir, too, had a strong sense of property, as was natural, and the disarrangement of the room struck him in that point of view, especially as Miss Wodehouse continued to prop herself up against the <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes in the back of her chair. Wodehouse looked from the wall to the table, and saw what appeared to him a clear case of intended spoliation. “By Jove! they didn’t mean to go empty-handed,” said the vagabond, who naturally judged according to his own standard, and knew no better. Upon which Lucy, rising with youthful state and dignity, took the explanation upon herself.</p>
			<p>“I do not see why we should have the mortification of a spectator,” said Lucy, who already, having been engaged three-quarters of an hour, felt deeply disinclined to reveal the weak points of her own family to the inspection of the Wentworths. “All that there is to explain can be done very simply. Thank you, I will not sit down. Up to this time we may be allowed to imagine ourselves in our own⁠—in our father’s house. What we have to say is simple enough.”</p>
			<p>“But pardon me, my dear Miss Wodehouse⁠—” said Jack Wentworth.</p>
			<p>“My sister is Miss Wodehouse,” said Lucy. “What there is to settle had better be arranged with our⁠—our brother. If he will tell us precisely when he wishes us to go away, we shall be ready. Mary is going to be married,” she went on, turning round so as to face Wodehouse, and addressing him pointedly, though she did not look at him⁠—to the exclusion of Jack, who, experienced man as he was, felt disconcerted, and addressed himself with more precaution to a task which was less easy than he supposed.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Lucy!” cried Miss Wodehouse, with a blush worthy of eighteen. It was perhaps the first time that the fact had been so broadly stated, and the sudden announcement made before two men overwhelmed the timid woman. Then she was older than Lucy, and had picked up in the course of her career one or two inevitable scraps of experience, and she could not but wonder with a momentary qualm what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor might think of his brother-in-law. Lucy, who thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor only too well off, went on without regarding her sister’s exclamation.</p>
			<p>“I do not know when the marriage is to be⁠—I don’t suppose they have fixed it yet,” said Lucy; “but it appears to me that it would save us all some trouble if we were allowed to remain until that time. I do not mean to ask any favour,” she said, with a little more sharpness and less dignity. “We could pay rent for that matter, if⁠—if it were desired. She is your sister,” said Lucy, suddenly looking Wodehouse in the face, “as well as mine. I daresay she has done as much for you as she has for me. I don’t ask any favour for her⁠—but I would cut off my little finger if that would please her,” cried the excited young woman, with a wildness of illustration so totally out of keeping with the matter referred to, that Miss Wodehouse, in the midst of her emotion, could scarcely restrain a scream of terror; “and you too might be willing to do something; you cannot have any kind of feeling for me,” Lucy continued, recovering herself; “but you might perhaps have some feeling for Mary. If we can be permitted to remain until her marriage takes place, it may perhaps bring about⁠—a feeling⁠—more like⁠—relations; and I shall be able to⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Forgive you,” Lucy was about to say, but fortunately stopped herself in time; for it was the fact of his existence that she had to forgive, and naturally such an amount of toleration was difficult to explain. As for Wodehouse himself, he listened to this appeal with very mingled feelings. Some natural admiration and liking woke in his dull mind as Lucy spoke. He was not destitute of good impulses, nor of the ordinary human affections. His little sister was pretty, and a lady, and clever enough to put Jack Wentworth much more in the background than usual. He said, “By Jove” to himself three or four times over in his beard, and showed a little emotion when she said he could have no feeling for her. At that point of Lucy’s address he moved about uneasily in his chair, and plucked at his beard, and felt himself anything but comfortable. “By Jove! I never had a chance,” the prodigal said, in his undertone. “I might have cared a deal for her if I had had a chance. She might have done a fellow good, by Jove!” mutterings of which Lucy took no manner of notice, but proceeded with her speech. When she had ended, and it became apparent that an answer was expected of him, Wodehouse flushed all over with the embarrassment of the position. He cleared his throat, he shifted his eyes, which were embarrassed by Lucy’s gaze, he pushed his chair from the table, and made various attempts to collect himself, but at last ended by a pitiful appeal to Jack Wentworth, who had been looking seriously on. “You might come to a fellow’s assistance!” cried Wodehouse. “By Jove! it was for that you came here.”</p>
			<p>“The Miss Wodehouses evidently prefer to communicate with their brother direct,” said Jack Wentworth, “which is a very natural sentiment. If I interfere, it is simply because I have had the advantage of talking the matter over, and understanding a little of what you mean. Miss Wodehouse, your brother is not disposed to act the part of a domestic tyrant. He has come here to offer you the house, which must have so many tender associations for you, not for a short period, as you wish, but for⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t know she was going to be married!” exclaimed Wodehouse⁠—“that makes all the difference, by Jove! Lucy will marry fast enough; but as for Mary, I never thought she would hook anyone at her time of life,” said the vagabond, with a rude laugh. He turned to Lucy, not knowing any better, and with some intention of pleasing her; but being met by a look of indignation under which he faltered, he went back to his natural role of sulky insolence. “By Jove! when I gave in to make such an offer, I never thought she had a chance of getting married,” said the heir. “I aint going to give what belongs to me to another man⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Your brother wishes,” said Jack Wentworth, calmly, “to make over the house and furniture as it stands to you and your sister, Miss Wodehouse. Of course it is not to be expected that he should be sorry to get his father’s property; but he is sorry that there should be no⁠—no provision for you. He means that you should have the house⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But I never thought she was going to be married, by Jove!” protested the rightful owner. “Look here, Molly; you shall have the furniture. The house would sell for a good bit of money. I tell you, Wentworth⁠—”</p>
			<p>Jack Wentworth did not move from the mantlepiece where he was standing, but he cast a glance upon his unlucky follower which froze the words on his lips. “My good fellow, you are quite at liberty to decline my mediation in your affairs. Probably you can manage them better your own way,” said Wodehouse’s hero. “I can only beg the Miss Wodehouses to pardon my intrusion.” Jack Wentworth’s first step towards the door let loose a flood of nameless terrors upon the soul of his victim. If he were abandoned by his powerful protector, what would become of him? His very desire of money, and the avarice which prompted him to grudge making any provision for his sisters, was, after all, not real avarice, but the spendthrift’s longing for more to spend. The house which he was sentenced to give up represented not so much gold and silver, but so many pleasures, fine dinners, and bad company. He could order the dinners by himself, it is true, and get men like himself to eat them; but the fine people⁠—the men who had once been fine, and who still retained a certain tarnished glory⁠—were, so far as Wodehouse was concerned, entirely in Jack Wentworth’s keeping. He made a piteous appeal to his patron as the great man turned to go away.</p>
			<p>“I don’t see what good it can do <em>you</em> to rob a poor fellow!” cried Wodehouse. “But look here, I aint going to turn against your advice. I’ll give it them, by Jove, for life⁠—that is, for Mary’s life,” said the munificent brother. “She’s twenty years older than Lucy⁠—”</p>
			<p>“How do you dare to subject us to such insults?” cried the indignant Lucy, whose little hand clenched involuntarily in her passion. She had a great deal of self-control, but she was not quite equal to such an emergency; and it was all she could do to keep from stamping her foot, which was the only utterance of rage possible to a gentlewoman in her position. “I would rather see my father’s house desecrated by you living in it,” she cried, passionately, “than accept it as a gift from your hands. Mary, we are not obliged to submit to this. Let us rather go away at once. I will not remain in the same room with this man!” cried Lucy. She was so overwhelmed with her unwonted passion that she lost all command of the position, and even of herself, and was false for the moment to all her sweet codes of womanly behaviour. “How dare you, sir!” she cried in the sudden storm for which nobody was prepared. “We will remove the things belonging to us, with which nobody has any right to interfere, and we will leave immediately. Mary, come with me!” When she had said this, Lucy swept out of the room, pale as a little fury, and feeling in her heart a savage female inclination to strike Jack Wentworth, who opened the door for her, with her little white clenched hand. Too much excited to remark whether her sister had followed her, Lucy ran upstairs to her room, and there gave way to the inevitable tears. Coming to herself after that was a terribly humbling process to the little Anglican. She had never fallen into a “passion” before that she knew of, certainly never since nursery times; and often enough her severe serene girlhood had looked reproving and surprised upon the tumults of Prickett’s Lane, awing the belligerents into at least temporary silence. Now poor Lucy sat and cried over her downfall; she had forgotten herself; she had been conscious of an inclination to stamp, to scold, even to strike, in the vehemence of her indignation; and she was utterly overpowered by the thought of her guiltiness. “The very first temptation!” she said to herself; and made terrible reflections upon her own want of strength and endurance. Today, too, of all days, when God had been so good to her! “If I yield to the first temptation like this, how shall I ever endure to the end?” cried Lucy, and in her heart thought, with a certain longing, of the sacrament of penance, and tried to think what she could do that would be most disagreeable, to the mortifying of the flesh. Perhaps if she had possessed a more lively sense of humour, another view of the subject might have struck Lucy; but humour, fortunately for the unity of human sentiment, is generally developed at a later period of life, and Lucy’s fit of passion only made her think with greater tenderness and toleration of her termagants in Prickett’s Lane.</p>
			<p>The three who were left downstairs were in their different ways impressed by Lucy’s passion. Jack Wentworth, being a man of humour and cultivation, was amused, but respectful, as having still a certain faculty of appreciating absolute purity when he saw it. As for Wodehouse, he gave another rude laugh, but was cowed, in spite of himself, and felt involuntarily what a shabby wretch he was, recognising that fact more impressively from the contempt of Lucy’s pale face than he could have done through hours of argument. Miss Wodehouse, for her part, though very anxious and nervous, was not without an interest in the question under discussion. <em>She</em> was not specially horrified by her brother, or anything he could say or do. He was Tom to her⁠—a boy with whom she had once played, and whom she had shielded with all her sisterly might in his first transgressions. She had suffered a great deal more by his means than Lucy could ever suffer, and consequently was more tolerant of him. She kept her seat with the <abbr>St.</abbr> Agnes in the chair behind, and watched the course of events with anxious steadiness. She did not care for money any more than Lucy did; but she could not help thinking it would be very pleasant if she could produce one good action on “poor Tom’s” part to plead for him against any possible criticisms of the future. Miss Wodehouse was old enough to know that her Rector was not an ideal hero, but an ordinary man, and it was quite possible that he might point a future moral now and then with “that brother of yours, my dear.” The elder sister waited accordingly, with her heart beating quick, to know the decision, very anxious that she might have at least one generous deed to record to the advantage of poor Tom.</p>
			<p>“I think we are quite decided on the point,” said Jack Wentworth. “Knowing your sentiments, Wodehouse, I left directions with Waters about the papers. I think you will find him to be trusted, Miss Wodehouse, if you wish to consult him about letting or selling⁠—”</p>
			<p>“By Jove!” exclaimed Wodehouse, under his breath.</p>
			<p>“Which, I suppose,” continued the superb Jack, “you will wish to do under the pleasant circumstances, upon which I beg to offer you my congratulations. Now, Tom, my good fellow, I am at your service. I think we have done our business here.”</p>
			<p>Wodehouse got up in his sulky reluctant way like a lazy dog. “I suppose you won’t try to move the furniture now?” he said. These were the only adieux he intended to make, and perhaps they might have been expressed with still less civility, had not Jack Wentworth been standing waiting for him at the door.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Tom! I am so thankful you have done it!” cried Miss Wodehouse. “It is not that I care for the money; but oh, Tom, I am so glad to think nobody can say anything now.” She followed them wistfully to the door, not giving up hopes of a kinder parting. “I think it is very kind and nice of you, and what dear papa would have wished,” said the elder sister, forgetting how all her father’s plans had been brought to nothing; “and of course you will live here all the same?” she said, with a little eagerness, “that is, till⁠—till⁠—as long as we are here⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Goodbye, Miss Wodehouse,” said Jack Wentworth. “I don’t think either your brother or I will stay much longer in Carlingford. You must accept my best wishes for your happiness all the same.”</p>
			<p>“You are very kind, I am sure,” said the embarrassed bride; “and oh, Tom, you will surely say goodbye? Say goodbye once as if you meant it; don’t go away as if you did not care. Tom, I always was very fond of you; and don’t you feel a little different to us, now you’ve done us a kindness?” cried Miss Wodehouse, going out after him to the landing-place. But Wodehouse was in no humour to be gracious. Instead of paying any attention to her, he looked regretfully at the property he had lost.</p>
			<p>“Goodbye,” he said, vaguely. “By Jove! I know better than Jack Wentworth does the value of property. We might have had a jolly month at Homburg out of that old place,” said the prodigal, with regret, as he went down the old-fashioned oak stair. That was his farewell to the house which he had entered so disastrously on the day of his father’s funeral. He followed his leader with a sulky aspect through the garden, not venturing to disobey, but yet feeling the weight of his chains. And this was how Wodehouse accomplished his personal share in the gift to his sisters, of which Miss Wodehouse told everybody that it was “so good of Tom!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
