<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-33" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</h2>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth had to go into Carlingford on some business when he left Miss Wodehouse; and as he went home again, having his head full of so many matters, he forgot for the moment what most immediately concerned himself, and was close upon Elsworthy’s shop, looking into the window, before he thought of it. Elsworthy himself was standing behind the counter, with a paper in his hand, from which he was expounding something to various people in the shop. It was getting late, and the gas was lighted, which threw the interior into very bright relief to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth outside. The Curate was still only a young man, though he was a clergyman, and his movements were not always guided by reason or sound sense. He walked into the shop, almost before he was aware what he was doing. The people were inconsiderable people enough⁠—cronies of Elsworthy⁠—but they were people who had been accustomed to look up very reverentially to the Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was far from being superior to their disapproval. There was a very visible stir among them as he entered, and Elsworthy came to an abrupt stop in his elucidations, and thrust the paper he had been reading into a drawer. Dead and sudden silence followed the entrance of the Curate. Peter Hayles, the druggist, who was one of the auditors, stole to the door with intentions of escape, and the women, of whom there were two or three, looked alarmed, not knowing what might come of it. As for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, there was only one thing possible for him to say. “Have you heard anything of Rosa, Elsworthy?” he asked, with great gravity, fixing his eyes upon the man’s face. The question seemed to ring into all the corners. Whether it was innocence or utter abandonment nobody could tell, and the spectators held their breath for the answer. Elsworthy, for his part, was as much taken by surprise as his neighbours. He grew very pale and livid in his sudden excitement, and lost his voice, and stood staring at the Curate like a man struck dumb. Perhaps <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth got bolder when he saw the effect he had produced. He repeated the question, looking towards poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Elsworthy, who had jumped from her husband’s side when he came in. The whole party looked like startled conspirators to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s eyes, though he had not the least idea what they had been doing. “Have you heard anything of Rosa?” he asked again; and everybody looked at Elsworthy, as if he were the guilty man, and had suborned the rest; which, indeed, in one sense, was not far from being the case.</p>
			<p>When Elsworthy came to himself, he gave <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth a sidelong dangerous look. “No, sir⁠—nothing,” said Rosa’s uncle. “Them as has hidden her has hidden her well. I didn’t expect to hear not yet,” said Elsworthy. Though <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth did not know what he meant, his little audience in the shop did, and showed, by the slightest murmur in the world, their conviction that the arrow had gone home, which naturally acted like a spur upon the Curate, who was not the wisest man in the world.</p>
			<p>“I am very sorry to see you in so much distress,” said the young man, looking at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Elsworthy’s red eyes, “but I trust things will turn out much better than you imagine. If I can do anything to help you, let me know,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. Perhaps it was foolish to say so much, knowing what he did, but unfortunately prudence was not the ruling principle at that moment in the Curate’s soul.</p>
			<p>“I was a-thinking of letting you know, sir,” said the clerk of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s, with deadly meaning; “leastways not me, but them as has taken me by the hand. There’s every prospect as it’ll all be known afore long,” said Elsworthy, pushing his wife aside and following <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with a ghastly caricature of his old obsequiousness, to the door. “There’s inquiries a-being made as was never known to fail. For one thing, I’ve written to them as knows a deal about the movements of a party as is suspected⁠—not to say as I’ve got good friends,” said Rosa’s guardian, standing upon the step of his own door, and watching the Curate out into the darkness. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth could not altogether restrain a slight thrill of unpleasant emotion, for Elsworthy, standing at his door with the light gleaming over him from behind, and his face invisible, had an unpleasant resemblance to a wild beast waiting for his prey.</p>
			<p>“I am glad to think you are likely to be so successful. Send me word as soon as you know,” said the Curate, and he pursued his way home afterwards, with feelings far from pleasant. He saw something was about to come of this more than he had thought likely, and the crisis was approaching. As he walked rapidly home, he concluded within himself to have a conversation with the Rector next day after <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s funeral, and to ask for an investigation into the whole matter. When he had come to this conclusion, he dismissed the subject from his mind as far as was possible, and took to thinking of the other matters which disturbed his repose, in which, indeed, it was very easy to get perplexed and bewildered to his heart’s content. Anyhow, one way and another, the day of poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s funeral must necessarily be an exciting and momentous day.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth had, however, no idea that its interest was to begin so early. When he was seated at breakfast reading his letters, a note was brought to him, which, coming in the midst of a lively chronicle of home news from his sister Letty, almost stopped for the moment the beating of the Curate’s heart. It took him so utterly by surprise, that more violent sentiments were lost for the moment in mere wonder. He read it over twice before he could make it out. It was from the Rector, and notwithstanding his wife’s remonstrances, and his own qualms of doubt and uncertainty, this was what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan said:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear Sir</b>⁠—It is my painful duty to let you know that certain rumours have reached my ears very prejudicial to your character as a clergyman, and which I understand to be very generally current in Carlingford. Such a scandal, if not properly dealt with, is certain to have an unfavourable effect upon the popular mind, and injure the clergy in the general estimation⁠—while it is, as I need not point out to you, quite destructive of your own usefulness. Under the circumstances, I have thought it my duty, as Rector of the parish, to take steps for investigating these reports. Of course I do not pretend to any authority over you, nor can I enforce in any way your participation in the inquiry or consent to it; but I beg to urge upon you strongly, as a friend, the advantage of assenting freely, that your innocence (if possible) may be made apparent, and your character cleared. I enclose the names of the gentlemen whose assistance I intend to request for this painful duty, in case you should object to any of them; and would again urge you, <em>for your own sake</em>, the expediency of concurrence. I regret to say that, though I would not willingly prejudge any man, much less a brother clergyman, I do not feel that it would be seemly on my part, under the circumstances, to avail myself of your assistance today in the burial-service for the late <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse.⁠—<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Believe me, very sincerely yours,</span></p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Morgan.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth looked up from this letter, he caught sight of his face in the mirror opposite, and gazed into his own eyes like a man stupefied. He had not been without vexations in eight-and-twenty years of a not uneventful life, but he had never known anything like the misery of that moment. It was nearly four hours later when he walked slowly up Grange Lane to the house, which before night might own so different a master, but he had found as yet no time to spare for the Wodehouses⁠—even for Lucy⁠—in the thoughts which were all occupied by the unlooked-for blow. Nobody could tell, not even himself, the mental discipline he had gone through before he emerged, rather stern, but perfectly calm, in the sunshine in front of the closed-up house. If it was not his to meet the solemn passenger at the gates with words of hope, at least he could do a man’s part to the helpless who had still to live; but the blow was cruel, and all the force of his nature was necessary to sustain it. All Carlingford knew, by the evidence of its senses, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth had been a daily visitor of the dead, and one of his most intimate friends, and nobody had doubted for a moment that to him would be assigned as great a portion of the service as his feelings permitted him to undertake. When the bystanders saw him join the procession, a thrill of surprise ran through the crowd; but nobody⁠—not even the man who walked beside him⁠—ventured to trifle with the Curate’s face so far as to ask why. The Grand Inquisitor himself, if such a mythical personage exists any longer, could not have invented a more delicate torture than that which the respectable and kindhearted Rector of Carlingford inflicted calmly, without knowing it, upon the Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s. How was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan to know that the sting would go to his heart? A Perpetual Curate without a district has nothing to do with a heart so sensitive. The Rector put on his own robes with a peaceful mind, feeling that he had done his duty, and, with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Leeson behind him, came to the church door with great solemnity to meet the procession. He read the words which are so sweet and so terrible with his usual reading-desk voice as he read the invitations every Sunday. He was a good man, but he was middle-aged, and not accessible to impression from the mere aspect of death; and he did not know <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse, nor care much for anything in the matter, except his own virtue in excluding the Perpetual Curate from any share in the service. Such was the Rector’s feeling in respect to this funeral, which made so much commotion in Carlingford. He felt that he was vindicating the purity of his profession as he threaded his way through the pathetic hillocks, where the nameless people were lying, to poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s grave.</p>
			<p>This, however, was not the only thing which aroused the wonder and interest of the townspeople when the two shrinking, hooded female figures, all black and unrecognisable, rose up trembling to follow their dead from the church to the grave. Everybody saw with wonder that their place was contested, and that somebody else, a man whom no one knew, thrust himself before them, and walked alone in the chief mourner’s place. As for Lucy, who, through her veil and her tears, saw nothing distinctly, this figure, which she did not know, struck her only with a vague astonishment. If she thought of it at all, she thought it a mistake, simple enough, though a little startling, and went on, doing all she could to support her sister, saying broken prayers in her heart, and far too much absorbed in the duty she was performing to think who was looking on, or to be conscious of any of the attending circumstances, except <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan’s voice, which was not the voice she had expected to hear. Miss Wodehouse was a great deal more agitated than Lucy. She knew very well who it was that placed himself before her, asserting his own right without offering any help to his sisters; and vague apprehensions, which she herself could not understand, came over her just at the moment when she required her strength most. As there were no other relations present, the place of honour next to the two ladies had been tacitly conceded to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth; and it was thus that the Curate rendered the last service to his old friend. It was a strange procession, and concentrated in itself all that was most exciting in Carlingford at the moment. Everybody observed and commented upon the strange man, who, all remarkable and unknown, with his great beard and sullen countenance, walked by himself as chief mourner. Who was he? and whispers arose and ran through the outskirts of the crowd of the most incredible description. Some said he was an illegitimate son whom <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse had left all his property to, but whom the ladies knew nothing of; some that it was a strange cousin, whom Lucy was to be compelled to marry or lose her share; and after a while people compared notes, and went back upon their recollections, and began to ask each other if it was true that Tom Wodehouse died twenty years ago in the West Indies? Then behind the two ladies⁠—poor ladies, whose fate was hanging in the balance, though they did not know it⁠—came <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth in his cap and gown, pale and stern as nobody ever had seen him before in Carlingford, excluded from all share in the service, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Leeson, in a flutter of surplice and solemnity, was giving his valuable assistance in. The churchyard at Carlingford had not lost its semi-rural air though the town had increased so much, for the district was very healthy, as everybody knows, and people did not die before their time, as in places less favoured. The townspeople, who knew <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse so well, lingered all about among the graves, looking with neighbourly, calm regret, but the liveliest curiosity. Most of the shopkeepers at that end of George Street had closed their shops on the mournful occasion, and felt themselves repaid. As for Elsworthy, he stood with a group of supporters round him, as near as possible to the funeral procession; and farther off in the distance, under the trees, was a much more elegant spectator⁠—an unlikely man enough to assist at such a spectacle, being no less a person than Jack Wentworth, in the perfection of an English gentleman’s morning apparel, perfectly at his ease and indifferent, yet listening with close attention to all the scraps of talk that came in his way. The centre of all this wondering, curious crowd, where so many passions and emotions and schemes and purposes were in full tide, and life was beating so strong and vehement, was the harmless dead, under the heavy pall which did not veil him so entirely from the living as did the hopes and fears and curious speculations which had already sprung up over him, filling up his place. Among the whole assembly there was not one heart really occupied by thoughts of him, except that of poor Lucy, who knew nothing of all the absorbing anxieties and terrors that occupied the others. She had still a moment’s leisure for her natural grief. It was all she could do to keep upright and support her sister, who had burdens to bear which Lucy knew nothing of; but still, concealed under her hood and veil, seeing nothing but the grave before her, hearing nothing but the sacred words and the terrible sound of “dust to dust,” the young creature stood steadfast, and gave the dead man who had loved her his due⁠—last offering of nature and love, sweeter to anticipate than any honours. Nobody but his child offered to poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse that last right of humanity, or made his grave sacred with natural tears.</p>
			<p>When they went back sadly out of all that blinding sunshine into the darkened house, it was not all over, as poor Lucy had supposed. She had begun to come to herself and understand once more the looks of the people about her, when the old maid, who had been the attendant of the sisters during all Lucy’s life, undid her wrappings, and in her agitation of the moment kissed her white cheek, and held her in her arms. “Oh, Miss Lucy, darling, don’t take on no more than you can help. I’m sore, sore afeared that there’s a deal of trouble afore you yet,” said the weeping woman. Though Lucy had not the smallest possible clue to her meaning, and was almost too much worn out to be curious, she could not help a vague thrill of alarm. “What is it, Alland?” she said, rising up from the sofa on which she had thrown herself. But Alland could do nothing but cry over her nursling and console her. “Oh, my poor dear! oh, my darling! as he never would have let the wind of heaven to blow rough upon her!” cried the old servant. And it was just then that Miss Wodehouse, who was trembling all over hysterically, came into the room.</p>
			<p>“We have to go downstairs,” said the elder sister. “Oh Lucy, my darling, it was not my fault at first. I should have told you last night to prepare you, and I had not the heart. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth has told me so often⁠—”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth?” said Lucy. She rose up, not quite knowing where she was; aware of nothing, except that some sudden calamity, under which she was expected to faint altogether, was coming to her by means of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. Her mind jumped at the only dim possibility that seemed to glimmer through the darkness. He must be married, she supposed, or about to be married; and it was this they insulted her by thinking that she could not bear. There was not a particle of colour in her face before, but the blood rushed into it with a bitterness of shame and rage which she had never known till now. “I will go down with you if it is necessary,” said Lucy; “but surely this is a strange time to talk of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s affairs.” There was no time to explain anything farther, for just then old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Western, who was a distant cousin, knocked at the door. “God help you, my poor dear children!” said the old lady; “they are all waiting for you downstairs,” and it was with this delusion in her mind, embittering every thought, that Lucy went into the drawing-room where they were all assembled. The madness of the idea did not strike her somehow, even when she saw the grave assembly, which it was strange to think could have been brought together to listen to any explanation from the Perpetual Curate. He was standing there prominent enough among them, with a certain air of suppressed passion in his face, which Lucy divined almost without seeing it. For her own part, she went in with perfect firmness, supporting her sister, whose trembling was painful to see. There was no other lady in the room except old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Western, who would not sit down, but hovered behind the chairs which had been placed for the sisters near the table at which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters was standing. By the side of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters was the man who had been at the funeral, and whom nobody knew, and a few gentlemen who were friends of the family were in the room⁠—the Rector, by virtue of his office, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks; and anyone whose attention was sufficiently disengaged to note the details of the scene might have perceived John, who had been fifteen years with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse, and the old cook in her black gown, who was of older standing in the family than Alland herself, peeping in, whenever it was opened, through the door.</p>
			<p>“Now that the Miss Wodehouses are here, we may proceed to business,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters. “Some of the party are already aware that I have an important communication to make. I am very sorry if it comes abruptly upon anybody specially interested. My late partner, much respected though he has always been, was a man of peculiar views in many respects. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks will bear me out in what I say. I had been his partner for ten years before I found this out, highly important as it will be seen to be; and I believe <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, though an intimate friend of the family, obtained the information by a kind of accident⁠—”</p>
			<p>The stranger muttered something in his beard which nobody could hear, and the Perpetual Curate interposed audibly. “Would it not be best to make the explanations afterwards?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth⁠—and he changed his own position and went over beside old <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Western, who was leaning upon Lucy’s chair. He put his own hand on the back of the chair with an involuntary impulse. As for Lucy, her first thrill of nervous strength had failed her: she began to get confused and bewildered; but whatever it was, no insult, no wound to her pride or affections, was coming to her from that hand which she knew was on her chair. She leaned back a little, with a long sigh. Her imagination could not conceive anything important enough for such a solemn intimation, and her attention began to flag in spite of herself. No doubt it was something about that money which people thought so interesting. Meanwhile <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters went on steadily with what he had to say, not sparing them a word of the preamble; and it was not till ten minutes later that Lucy started up with a sudden cry of incredulity and wonder, and repeated his last words. “His son!⁠—whose son?” cried Lucy. She looked all round her, not knowing whom to appeal to in her sudden consternation. “We never had a brother,” said the child of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s old age; “it must be some mistake.” There was a dead pause after these words. When she looked round again, a sickening conviction came to Lucy’s heart that it was no mistake. She rose up without knowing it, and looked round upon all the people, who were watching her with various looks of pity and curiosity and spectator-interest. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters had stopped speaking, and the terrible stranger made a step forward with an air that identified him. It was at him that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor was staring, who cleared his voice a great many times, and came forward to the middle of the room and looked as if he meant to speak; and upon him every eye was fixed except <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s, who was watching Lucy, and Miss Wodehouse’s, which were hidden in her hands. “We never had a brother,” she repeated, faltering; and then, in the extremity of her wonder and excitement, Lucy turned round, without knowing it, to the man whom her heart instinctively appealed to. “Is it true?” she said. She held out her hands to him with a kind of entreaty not to say so. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth made no reply to her question. He said only, “Let me take you away⁠—it is too much for you,” bending down over her, without thinking what he did, and drawing her hand through his arm. “She is not able for any more,” said the Curate, hurriedly; “afterwards we can explain to her.” If he could have remembered anything about himself at the moment, it is probable that he would have denied himself the comfort of supporting Lucy⁠—he, a man under ban; but he was thinking only of her, as he stood facing them all with her arm drawn through his; upon which conjunction the Rector and the late Rector looked with a grim aspect, disposed to interfere, but not knowing how.</p>
			<p>“All this may be very interesting to you,” said the stranger out of his beard; “if Lucy don’t know her brother, it is no fault of mine. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters has only said half he has got to say; and as for the rest, to sum it up in half-a-dozen words, I’m very glad to see you in my house, gentlemen, and I hope you will make yourselves at home. Where nobody understands, a man has to speak plain. I’ve been turned out all my life and, by Jove! I don’t mean to stand it any longer. The girls can have what their father’s left them,” said the vagabond, in his moment of triumph. “They aint my business no more than I was theirs. The property is freehold, and Waters is aware that I’m the heir.”</p>
			<p>Saying this, Wodehouse drew a chair to the table, and sat down with emphasis. He was the only man seated in the room, and he kept his place in his sullen way amid the excited group which gathered round him. As for Miss Wodehouse, some sense of what had happened penetrated even her mind. She too rose up and wiped her tears from her face, and looked round, pale and scared, to the Curate. “I was thinking⁠—of speaking to Lucy. I meant to ask her⁠—to take you back, Tom,” said the elder sister. “Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, tell me, for heaven’s sake, what does it mean?”</p>
			<p>“If I had only been permitted to explain,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters; “my worthy partner died intestate⁠—his son is his natural heir. Perhaps we need not detain the ladies longer, now that they understand it. All the rest can be better arranged with their representative. I am very sorry to add to their sufferings today,” said the polite lawyer, opening the door; “everything else can be made the subject of an arrangement.” He held the door open with a kind of civil coercion compelling their departure. The familiar room they were in no longer belonged to the Miss Wodehouses. Lucy drew her arm out of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s, and took her sister’s hand.</p>
			<p>“You will be our representative,” she said to him, out of the fullness of her heart. When the door closed, the Perpetual Curate took up his position, facing them all with looks more lofty than belonged even to his Wentworth blood. They had kept him from exercising his office at his friend’s grave, but nobody could take from him the still nobler duty of defending the oppressed.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
