<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
			<p>It was the next morning after this when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s strange lodger first appeared in the astonished house. He was the strangest lodger to be taken into a house of such perfect respectability, a house in Grange Lane; and it came to be currently reported in Carlingford after a time, when people knew more about it, that even the servants could not tell when or how he arrived, but had woke up one morning to find a pair of boots standing outside the closed door of the green room, which the good old lady kept for company, with sensations which it would be impossible to describe. Such a pair of boots they were too⁠—muddy beyond expression, with old mud which had not been brushed off for days⁠—worn shapeless, and patched at the sides; the strangest contrast to a handsome pair of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s, which he, contrary to his usual neat habits, had kicked off in his sitting-room, and which Sarah, the housemaid, had brought and set down on the landing, close by these mysterious and unaccountable articles. When the bell of the green room rang an hour or two later, Sarah and the cook, who happened to be standing together, jumped three yards apart and stared at each other; the sound gave them both “a turn.” But they soon got perfectly well used to that bell from the green room. It rung very often in the day, for “the gentleman” chose to sit there more than half his time; and if other people were private about him, it was a great deal more than he was about himself. He even sent the boots to be mended, to Sarah’s shame and confusion. For the credit of the house, the girl invented a story about them to calm the cobbler’s suspicions. “They was the easiest boots the gentleman had, being troubled with tender feet; and he wasn’t a-going to give them up because they was shabby,” said Sarah. He sent down his shabby clothes to be brushed, and wore <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s linen, to the indignation of the household. But he was not a man to be concealed in a corner. From where he sat in the green room, he whistled so beautifully that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s own pet canary paused astonished to listen, and the butcher’s boy stole into the kitchen surreptitiously to try if he could learn the art; and while he whistled, he filled the tidy room with parings and cuttings of wood, and carved out all kinds of pretty articles with his knife. But though he rang his bell so often, and was so tiresome with his litter, and gave so much trouble, Sarah’s heart, after a while, melted to “the gentleman.” He made her a present of a needlecase, and was very civil-spoken⁠—more so a great deal than the Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s; and such a subject of talk and curiosity had certainly not been in Carlingford for a hundred years.</p>
			<p>As for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin, she never gave any explanation at all on the subject, but accepted the fact of a new inmate cheerfully, as if she knew all about it. Of course she could not ask any of her nieces to visit her while the green room was occupied; and as they were all rather large, interfering, managing women, perhaps the old lady was not very sorry. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth himself was still less explanatory. When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse said to him, “What is this I hear about a brother of yours?⁠—they tell me you’ve got a brother staying with you. Well, that’s what I hear. Why don’t you bring him up to dinner? Come tomorrow;” the Perpetual Curate calmly answered, “Thank you; but there’s no brother of mine in Carlingford,” and took no further notice. Naturally, however, this strange apparition was much discussed in Grange Lane; the servants first, and then the ladies, became curious about him. Sometimes, in the evenings, he might be seen coming out of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s garden-door⁠—a shabby figure, walking softly in his patched boots. There never was light enough for anyone to see him; but he had a great beard, and smoked a short little pipe, and had evidently no regard for appearances. It was a kind of thing which few people approved of. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin ought not to permit it, some ladies said; and a still greater number were of the opinion that, rather than endure so strange a fellow-lodger, the Curate ought to withdraw, and find fresh lodgings. This was before the time when the public began to associate the stranger in a disagreeable way with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. Before they came to that, the people in Grange Lane bethought themselves of all <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s connections, to find out if there might not be some of them under hiding; and, of course, that excellent woman had a nephew or two whose conduct was not perfect; and then it came to be reported that it was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s brother⁠—that it was an unfortunate college chum of his⁠—that it was somebody who had speculated, and whom the Curate had gone shares with: but, in the meantime, no real information could be obtained about this mysterious stranger. The butcher’s boy, whose senses were quickened by mingled admiration and envy, heard him whistling all day long, sometimes hidden among the trees in the garden, sometimes from the open window of the green room, where, indeed, Lady Western’s page was ready to take his oath he had once seen the audacious unknown leaning out in the twilight, smoking a pipe. But no trap of conversation, however ingenious⁠—and many traps were laid for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth⁠—ever elicited from the Perpetual Curate any acknowledgment of the other lodger’s existence. The young Anglican opened his fine eyes a little wider than usual when he was asked sympathetically whether so many people in the house did not interfere with his quiet. “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s talk is very gentle,” said the Curate; “she never disturbs me.” And the mistress of the house was equally obtuse, and would not comprehend any allusion. The little household came to be very much talked of in Carlingford in consequence; and to meet that shabby figure in the evening, when one chanced to be out for a walk, made one’s company sought after in the best circles of society: though the fact is, that people began to be remiss in calling upon <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin, and a great many only left their cards as soon as it became evident that she did not mean to give any explanation. To have the Curate to stay with her was possible, without infringing upon her position; but matters became very different when she showed herself willing to take “anyone,” even when in equivocal apparel and patched boots.</p>
			<p>Probably the Curate had his own troubles during this period of his history. He was noticed to be a little quick and short in his temper for some time after Easter. For one thing, his aunts did not go away; they stayed in the Blue Boar, and sent for him to dinner, till the Curate’s impatience grew almost beyond bearing. It was a discipline upon which he had not calculated, and which exceeded the bounds of endurance, especially as Miss Leonora questioned him incessantly about his “work,” and still dangled before him, like an unattainable sweetmeat before a child, the comforts and advantages of Skelmersdale, where poor old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shirley had rallied for the fiftieth time. The situation altogether was very tempting to Miss Leonora; she could not make up her mind to go away and leave such a very pretty quarrel in progress; and there can be no doubt that it would have been highly gratifying to her vanity as an Evangelical woman to have had her nephew brought to task for missionary work carried on in another man’s parish, even though that work was not conducted entirely on her own principles. She lingered, accordingly, with a great hankering after Wharfside, to which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth steadily declined to afford her any access. She went to the afternoon service sometimes, it is true, but only to be afflicted in her soul by the sight of Miss Wodehouse and Lucy in their grey cloaks, not to speak of the rubric to which the Curate was so faithful. It was a trying experience to his Evangelical aunt; but at the same time it was a “great work;” and she could not give up the hope of being able one time or other to appropriate the credit of it, and win him over to her own “views.” If that consummation could but be attained, everything would become simple; and Miss Leonora was a true Wentworth, and wanted to see her nephew in Skelmersdale: so it may easily be understood that, under present circumstances, there were great attractions for her in Carlingford.</p>
			<p>It was, accordingly, with a beating heart that Miss Dora, feeling a little as she might have been supposed to feel thirty years before, had she ever stolen forth from the well-protected enclosure of Skelmersdale Park to see a lover, put on her bonnet in the early twilight, and, escaping with difficulty the lively observations of her maid, went tremulously down Grange Lane to her nephew’s house. She had never yet visited Frank, and this visit was unquestionably clandestine. But then the news with which her heart was beating was important enough to justify the step she was taking⁠—at least so she whispered to herself; though whether dear Frank would be pleased, or whether he would still think it “my fault,” poor Miss Dora could not make up her mind. Nothing happened in the quiet road, where there were scarcely any passengers, and the poor lady arrived with a trembling sense of escape from unknown perils at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s garden-door. For Miss Dora was of opinion, like some few other ladies, that to walk alone down the quietest of streets was to lay herself open to unheard-of dangers. She put out her trembling hand to ring the bell, thinking her perils over⁠—for of course Frank would walk home with her⁠—when the door suddenly opened, and a terrible apparition, quite unconscious of anybody standing there, marched straight out upon Miss Dora, who gave a little scream, and staggered backwards, thinking the worst horrors she had dreamed of were about to be realised. They were so close together that the terrified lady took in every detail of his appearance. She saw the patched boots and that shabby coat which Sarah the housemaid felt that she rather demeaned herself by brushing. It looked too small for him, as coats will do when they get shabby; and, to complete the alarming appearance of the man, he had no hat, but only a little travelling-cap surmounting the redundancy of hair, mustache, and beard, which were enough of themselves to strike any nervous woman with terror. “Oh, I beg your pardon,” cried poor Miss Dora, hysterically; “I wanted to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth;” and she stood trembling and panting for breath, holding by the wall, not quite sure that this apparition could be appeased by any amount of apologies. It was a great comfort to her when the monster took off its cap, and when she perceived, by the undulations of the beard, something like a smile upon its hidden lips. “I believe <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth is at church,” said the new lodger: “may I have the pleasure of seeing you safely across to <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s?” At which speech Miss Dora trembled more and more, and said, faintly, “No, thank you,”⁠—for who could tell what the man’s intentions might be? The result was, however, that he only put on his cap again, and went off like any other human creature in the other direction, and that slowly; with tremulous steps Miss Dora pursued her way to her nephew’s pretty church. She could not have described, as she herself said, what a relief it was after all this, to take Frank’s arm, as she met him at the door of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s. He was coming out, and the young lady with the grey cloak had been one of the congregation; and, to tell the truth, Miss Dora was an unwelcome addition just then to the party. Lucy’s coming had been accidental, and it was very sweet to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth to be able to conclude that he was obliged to walk home with her. They were both coming out from their evening devotions into the tranquil spring twilight, very glad of the charmed quiet, and happy somehow to find themselves alone together. That had happened but seldom of late; and a certain expectation of something that might happen hovered over the heads of Lucy and the Curate. It did not matter that he dared not say to her what was in his heart. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was only a young man after all, and the thrill of a possible revelation was upon him in that half-hour upon which he was entering with so profound a sense of happiness. And then it was an accidental meeting, and if anything did happen, they could not blame themselves as if they had sought this opportunity of being together. The circumstances were such that they might call it providential, if anything came of it. But just as the two had made their first step out of the church, where the organ was still murmuring low in the darkness, and where the music of the last Amen, in which he had recognised Lucy’s voice, had not quite died from the Curate’s ears, to meet Miss Dora, pale and fluttered, full of news and distress, with no other thought in her mind but to appropriate her dear Frank, and take his arm and gain his ear! It was very hard upon the Perpetual Curate. As for Lucy, she, of course, did not say anything, but merely arranged her veil and greeted Miss Wentworth sweetly. Lucy walked on the other side of the Curate, saying little as Miss Dora’s eager shower of questions and remarks ran on. Perhaps she had a little insight into <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s feelings, and no doubt it was rather tantalising. When they came to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s door, the young Anglican made a spasmodic effort, which in his heart he felt to be unprincipled, and which, had it been successful, would have totally taken away the accidental and unpremeditated character of this walk with Lucy, which he could not find it in his heart to relinquish. He proposed that his aunt should go in and rest while he saw Miss Wodehouse safely home⁠—he was sure she was tired, he said, eagerly. “No, my dear, not at all,” said Miss Dora; “it is such a pleasant evening, and I know Miss Wodehouse’s is not very far off. I should like the walk, and, besides, it is too late, you know, to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin, and I should not like to go in without calling on her; and besides⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth in his aggravation gave a momentary sudden glance at Lucy when she had no expectation of it. That glance of disappointment⁠—of disgust⁠—of love and longing, was no more intentional than their meeting; could he help it, if it revealed that heart which was in such a state of commotion and impatience? Anyhow, the look gave Lucy sufficient occupation to keep her very quiet on the other side while Miss Dora maundered on.</p>
			<p>“I met the strangest man coming out when I was going to ring your bell. You will think it very foolish, Frank, but he frightened me,” she said. “A man with a terrible beard, and a⁠—a shabby man, my dear. Who could it be? Not a person to be seen coming out of a house where a clergyman lives. He could not be any friend of yours?”</p>
			<p>“The other lodger, I suppose,” said the Curate, briefly. “When are you going away?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, my dear boy, we are not going away; I came to tell you. But, Frank, you don’t mean to say that such a man as that lodges in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s house? I don’t think it is safe for you⁠—I don’t think it is respectable. People might think he was a friend of yours. I wonder if Miss Wodehouse has ever seen him⁠—a great man with a beard? To be sure, a man might have a beard and yet be respectable; but I am sure, if Miss Wodehouse saw him, she would agree with me in thinking⁠—Frank, my dear boy, what is the matter? Have I said anything wrong?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing that I know of,” said the Curate, who had given her arm a little angry pressure to stop the stream of utterance⁠—“only that I am not interested in the other lodger. Tell me about your going away.”</p>
			<p>“But I must appeal to Miss Wodehouse: it is for your own sake, my dear Frank,” said aunt Dora⁠—“a clergyman should be so careful. I don’t know what your aunt Leonora would say. Don’t you think to see a man like that coming out of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s house is not as it should be? I assure you he frightened me.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think I have seen him,” said Lucy. “But shouldn’t a clergyman’s house be like the church, open to good and bad?⁠—for it is to the wicked and the miserable you are sent,” said the Sister of Mercy, lowering her voice and glancing up at the Perpetual Curate. They could have clasped each other’s hands at that moment, almost without being aware that it was any personal feeling which made their agreement so sweet. As for Miss Dora, she went on leaning on her nephew’s arm, totally unconscious of the suppressed rapture and elevation in which the two were moving at the other side.</p>
			<p>“That is very true. I am sure your aunt Leonora would approve of that, dear,” said Miss Dora, with a little answering pressure on her nephew’s arm⁠—“but still I have a feeling that a clergyman should always take care to be respectable. Not that he should neglect the wicked,” continued the poor aunt, apologetically, “for a poor sinner turning from the evil of his ways is the⁠—the most interesting⁠—sight in the world, even to the angels, you know; but to <em>live</em> with them in the same house, my dear⁠—I am sure that is what I never could advise, nor Leonora either; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin ought to know better, and have him away. Don’t you know who he is, Frank? I could not be content without finding out, if it was me.”</p>
			<p>“I have nothing to do with him,” said the Curate, hurriedly: “it is a subject I don’t want to discuss. Never mind him. What do you mean by saying you are not going away?”</p>
			<p>“My dear, Leonora has been thinking it all over,” said Miss Dora, “and we are so anxious about you. Leonora is very fond of you, though she does not show it; and you know the Meritons have just come home from India, and have not a house to go to. So you see we thought, as you are not quite so comfortable as we could wish to see you, Frank⁠—and perhaps we might be of some use⁠—and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shirley is better again, and no immediate settlement has to be made about Skelmersdale;⁠—that on the whole, if Leonora and you were to see more of each other⁠—oh, my dear boy, don’t be so hasty; it was all her own doing⁠—it was not my fault.”</p>
			<p>“Fault! I am sorry to be the occasion of so many arrangements,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with his stiff manner; “but, of course, if you like to stay in Carlingford I shall be very happy⁠—though there is not much preaching here that will suit my aunt Leonora: as for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shirley, I hope he’ll live forever. I was at <abbr>No.</abbr> 10 today,” continued the Curate, turning his head to the other side, and changing his tone in a manner marvellous to Miss Dora. “I don’t think she can live much longer. You have done a great deal to smooth her way in this last stage. Poor soul! she thinks she has been a great sinner,” said the young man, with a kind of wondering pity. He had a great deal to vex him in his own person, and he knew of some skeletons very near at hand, but somehow at that moment it was hard to think of the extremities of mortal trouble, of death and anguish⁠—those dark deeps of life by which Lucy and he sometimes stood together in their youth and happiness. A marvelling remorseful pity came to his heart. He could not believe in misery, with Lucy walking softly in the spring twilight by his side.</p>
			<p>“But, Frank, you are not taking any notice of what I say,” said Miss Dora, with something like a suppressed sob. “I don’t doubt your sick people are very important, but I thought you would take <em>some</em> interest. I came down to tell you, all the way by myself.”</p>
			<p>“My sister would like to call on you, Miss Wentworth,” said Lucy, interposing. “Gentlemen never understand what one says. Perhaps we could be of some use to you if you are going to settle in Carlingford. I think she has been a great deal better since she confessed,” continued the charitable Sister, looking up to the Curate, and, like him, dropping her voice. “The absolution was such a comfort. Now she seems to feel as if she could die. And she has so little to live for!” said Lucy, with a sigh of sympathetic feeling, remorseful too. Somehow it seemed cruel to feel so young, so hopeful, so capable of happiness, with such desolation close at hand.</p>
			<p>“Not even duty,” said the Curate; “and to think that the Church should hesitate to remove the last barriers out of the way! I would not be a priest if I were debarred from the power of delivering such a poor soul.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Frank,” said Miss Dora, with a long breath of fright and horror, “<em>what</em> are you saying? Oh, my dear, don’t say it over again, I don’t want to hear it! I hope when we are dying we shall all feel what great great sinners we are,” said the poor lady, who, between vexation and mortification, was ready to cry, “and not think that one is better than another. Oh, my dear, there is that man again! Do you think it is safe to meet him in such a lonely road? If he comes across and speaks to me any more I shall faint,” cried poor Miss Dora, whose opinions were not quite in accordance with her feelings. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth did not say anything to soothe her, but with his unoccupied hand he made an involuntary movement towards Lucy’s cloak, and plucked at it to bring her nearer, as the bearded stranger loomed dimly past, looking at the group. Lucy felt the touch, and wondered and looked up at him in the darkness. She could not comprehend the Curate’s face.</p>
			<p>“Are <em>you</em> afraid of him?” she said, with a slight smile; “if it is only his beard I am not alarmed; and here is papa coming to meet me. I thought you would have come for me sooner, papa. Has anything happened?” said Lucy, taking <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s arm, who had suddenly appeared from underneath the lamp, still unlighted, at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks’s door. She clung to her father with unusual eagerness, willing enough to escape from the darkness and the Curate’s side, and all the tremulous sensations of the hour.</p>
			<p>“What could happen?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse, who still looked “limp” from his recent illness, “though I hear there are doubtful people about; so they tell me⁠—but you ought to know best, Wentworth. Who is that fellow in the beard that went by on the other side? Not little Lake the drawing-master? Fancied I had seen the build of the man before⁠—eh?⁠—a stranger? Well, it’s a mistake, perhaps. Can’t be sure of anything nowadays;⁠—memory failing. Well, that’s what the doctor says. Come in and rest and see Molly; as for me, I’m not good for much, but you won’t get better company than the girls, or else that’s what folks tell me. Who did you say that fellow was?” said the churchwarden, leaning across his daughter to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s face.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know anything about him,” said the Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s.</p>
			<p>And curiously enough silence fell upon the little party, nobody could tell how;⁠—for two minutes, which looked like twenty, no one spoke. Then Lucy roused herself, apparently with a little effort. “We seem to talk of nothing but the man with the beard tonight,” she said. “Mary knows everything that goes on in Carlingford⁠—she will tell us about him; and if Miss Wentworth thinks it too late to come in, we will say good night,” she continued, with a little decision of tone, which was not incomprehensible to the Perpetual Curate. Perhaps she was a little provoked and troubled in her own person. To say so much in looks and so little in words, was a mode of procedure which puzzled Lucy. It fretted her, because it looked unworthy of her hero. She withdrew within the green door, holding her father’s arm fast, and talking to him, while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth strained his ears after the voice, which he thought he could have singled out from a thousand voices. Perhaps Lucy talked to drown her thoughts; and the Curate went away dumb and abstracted, with his aunt leaning on his arm on the other side of the wall. He could not be interested, as Miss Dora expected him to be, in the Miss Wentworths’ plans. He conducted her to the Blue Boar languidly, with an evident indifference to the fact that his aunt Leonora was about to become a permanent resident in Carlingford. He said “Good night” kindly to little Rosa Elsworthy, looking out with bright eyes into the darkness at the door of her uncle’s shop; but he said little to Miss Dora, who could not tell what to make of him, and swallowed her tears as quietly as possible under her veil. When he had deposited his aunt safely at the inn, the Perpetual Curate hastened down Grange Lane at a great pace. The first sound he heard on entering <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s garden was the clear notes of the stranger’s whistle among the trees; and with an impatient exclamation <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth sought his fellow-lodger, who was smoking as usual, pacing up and down a shaded walk, where, even in daylight, he was pretty well concealed from observation. The Curate looked as if he had a little discontent and repugnance to get over before he could address the anonymous individual who whistled so cheerily under the trees. When he did speak it was an embarrassed and not very intelligible call.</p>
			<p>“I say⁠—are you there? I want to speak to you,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the stranger, turning sharply round. “I am here, a dog without a name. What have you got to say?”</p>
			<p>“Only that you must be more careful,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth again, with a little stiffness. “You will be recognised if you don’t mind. I have just been asked who you were by⁠—somebody who thought he had seen you before.”</p>
			<p>“By whom?”</p>
			<p>“Well, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse,” said the Curate. “I may as well tell you; if you mean to keep up this concealment you must take care.”</p>
			<p>“By Jove!” said the stranger, and then he whistled a few bars of the air which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s arrival had interrupted. “What is a fellow to do?” he said, after an interjection. “I sometimes think I had better risk it all⁠—eh! don’t you think so? I can’t shut myself up forever here.”</p>
			<p>“That must be as you think best,” said the Perpetual Curate, in whom there appeared no movement of sympathy; and he said no more, though the doubtful individual by his side lifted an undecided look to his face, and once more murmured in perplexed tones a troubled exclamation: “A man must have a little amusement somehow,” the stranger said, with an aggrieved voice; and then abruptly left his unsociable companion, and went off to his room, where he summoned Sarah to bring lights, and tried to talk to her a little in utter dearth of society. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth stayed behind, pacing up and down the darkening walk. The Curate’s thoughts were far from satisfactory. There was not much comfort anywhere, let him look where he pleased. When a man has no spot in all his horizon on which his eye can rest with comfort, there is something more discouraging in the prospect than a positive calamity. He could not take refuge even in the imaginations of his love, for it was clear enough that already a sentiment of surprise had risen in Lucy’s mind, and her tranquillity was shaken. And perhaps he had done rashly to plunge into other people’s troubles⁠—he upon whom a curious committee of aunts were now to sit <i xml:lang="fr">en permanence</i>. He went in to write his sermon, far from being so assured of things in general as that discourse was when it was written, though it was a little relief to his mind to fall back upon an authority somewhere, and to refer, in terms which were perhaps too absolute to be altogether free of doubt, to the Church, which had arranged everything for her children in one department of their concerns at least. If it were only as easy to know what ought to be done in one’s personal affairs as to decide what was the due state of mind expected by the Church on the second Sunday after Easter! But being under that guidance, at least he could not go wrong in his sermon, which was one point of ease amid the many tribulations of the Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
