<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</h2>
			<p>It was the afternoon of the same day on which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor arrived in Carlingford that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth received the little note from Miss Wodehouse which was so great a consolation to the Perpetual Curate. By that time he had begun to experience humiliations more hard to bear than anything he had yet known. He had received constrained greetings from several of his most cordial friends; his people in the district, all but Tom Burrows, looked askance upon him; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks, who had never taken kindly to the young Anglican, had met him with satirical remarks in his dry Scotch fashion, which were intolerable to the Curate. In these circumstances, it was balm to his soul to have his sympathy once more appealed to, and by those who were nearest to his heart. The next day was that appointed for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s funeral, to which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth had been looking forward with a little excitement⁠—wondering, with indignant misery, whether the covert insults he was getting used to would be repeated even over his old friend’s grave. It was while this was in his mind that he received Miss Wodehouse’s little note. It was very hurriedly written, on the terrible black-edged paper which, to such a simple soul as Miss Wodehouse, it was a kind of comfort to use in the moment of calamity. “Dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth,” it said, “I am in great difficulty, and don’t know what to do: come, I beg of you, and tell me what is best. My dear Lucy insists upon going tomorrow, and I can’t cross her when her heart is breaking, and I don’t know what to do. Please to come, if it were only for a moment. Dear, dear papa, and all of us, have always had such confidence in you!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was seated, very disconsolate, in his study when this appeal came to him: he was rather sick of the world and most things in it; a sense of wrong eclipsed the sunshine for the moment, and obscured the skies; but it was comforting to be appealed to⁠—to have his assistance and his protection sought once more. He took his hat immediately and went up the sunny road, on which there was scarcely a passenger visible, to the closed-up house, which stood so gloomy and irresponsive in the sunshine. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse had not been a man likely to attract any profound love in his lifetime, or sense of loss when he was gone; but yet it was possible to think, with the kindly, half-conscious delusion of nature, that had <em>he</em> been living, he would have known better; and the Curate went into the darkened drawing-room, where all the shutters were closed, except those of the little window in the corner, where Lucy’s worktable stood, and where a little muffled sunshine stole in through the blind. Everything was in terribly good order in the room. The two sisters had been living in their own apartments, taking their forlorn meals in the little parlour which communicated with their sleeping chambers, during this week of darkness; and nobody had come into the drawing-room except the stealthy housemaid, who contemplated herself and her new mourning for an hour at a stretch in the great mirror without any interruption, while she made “tidy” the furniture which nobody now disturbed. Into this sombre apartment Miss Wodehouse came gliding, like a gentle ghost, in her black gown. She too, like John and the housemaid and everybody about, walked and talked under her breath. There was now no man in the house entitled to disturb those proprieties with which a female household naturally hedges round all the great incidents of life; and the affairs of the family were all carried on in a whisper, in accordance with the solemnity of the occasion⁠—a circumstance which had naturally called the ghost of a smile to the Curate’s countenance as he followed John upstairs. Miss Wodehouse herself, though she was pale, and spent half her time, poor soul! in weeping, and had, besides, living encumbrances to trouble her helpless path, did not look amiss in her black gown. She came in gliding without any noise, but with a little expectation in her gentle countenance. She was one of the people whom experience never makes any wiser; and she could not help hoping to be delivered from her troubles this time, as so often before, as soon as she should have transferred them to somebody else’s shoulders, and taken “advice.”</p>
			<p>“Lucy has made up her mind that we are to go tomorrow,” said Miss Wodehouse, drying her tears. “It was not the custom in my young days, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, and I am sure I don’t know what to say; but I can’t bear to cross her, now that she has nobody but me. She was always the best child in the world,” said the poor lady⁠—“far more comfort to poor dear papa than I ever could be; but to hear her talk you would think that she had never done anything. And oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, if that was all I should not mind; but we have always kept things a secret from her; and now I have had a letter, and I don’t know what it is possible to do.”</p>
			<p>“A letter from your brother?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, eagerly.</p>
			<p>“From Tom,” said the elder sister; “poor, poor Tom! I am sure papa forgave him at the last, though he did not say anything. Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, he was such a nice boy once; and if Lucy only knew, and I could summon up the courage to tell her, and he would change his ways, as he promised⁠—don’t think me fickle or changeable, or look as if I didn’t know my own mind,” cried poor Miss Wodehouse, with a fresh flow of tears; “but oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, if he only would change his ways, as he promised, think what a comfort it would be to us to have him at home!”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the Curate, with a little bitterness. Here was another instance of the impunities of wickedness. “I think it very likely indeed that you will have him at home,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth⁠—“almost certain; the wonder is that he went away. Will you tell me where he dates his letter from? I have a curiosity to know.”</p>
			<p>“You are angry,” said the anxious sister. “Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, I know he does not deserve anything else, but you have always been so kind. I put his letter in my pocket to show you⁠—at least, I am sure I intended to put it in my pocket. We have scarcely been in this room since⁠—since⁠—” and here Miss Wodehouse broke down, and had to take a little time to recover. “I will go and get the letter,” she said, as at last she regained her voice, and hurried away through the partial darkness with her noiseless step, and the long black garments which swept noiselessly over the carpet. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth for his part went to the one window which was only veiled by a blind, and comforted himself a little in the sunshine. The death atmosphere weighed upon the young man and took away his courage. If he was only wanted to pave the way for the reception of the rascally brother for whose sins he felt convinced he was himself suffering, the consolation of being appealed to would be sensibly lessened, and it was hard to have no other way of clearing himself than by criminating Lucy’s brother, and bringing dishonour upon her name. While he waited for Miss Wodehouse’s return, he stood by Lucy’s table, with very little of the feeling which had once prompted him to fold his arms so caressingly with an impulse of tenderness upon the chair which stood beside it. He was so much absorbed in his own thoughts that he did not hear at first the sound of a hesitating hand upon the door, which at length, when repeated, went to the Curate’s heart. He turned round rapidly, and saw Lucy standing on the threshold in her profound mourning. She was very pale, and her blue eyes looked large and full beyond their natural appearance, dilated with tears and watching; and when they met those of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, they filled full like flower-cups with dew; but besides this Lucy made no demonstration of her grief. After that momentary hesitation at the door, she came in and gave the Curate her hand. Perhaps it was a kind of defiance, perhaps a natural yearning, which drew her out of her chamber when she heard of his presence; both sentiments sprang out of the same feeling; and the Curate, when he looked at her, bethought himself of the only moment when he had been able to imagine that Lucy loved him; that moment by her father’s bedside, of which the impression had been dulled since then by a crowd of events, when she looked with such reproach and disappointment and indignation into his face.</p>
			<p>“I heard you were here,” said Lucy, “and I thought you might think it strange not to see us both.” And then she paused, perhaps finding it less easy than she thought to explain why she had come. “We ought to thank you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, for your kindness, though I⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You were angry with me,” said the Curate. “I know you thought me heartless; but a man must bear to be misconceived when he has duty to do,” the young clergyman added, with a swelling heart. Lucy did not know the fuller significance of his words; and there was a loftiness in them which partly affronted her, and set all her sensitive woman-pride in arms against him.</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon,” she said, faltering, and then the two stood beside each other in silence, with a sense of estrangement. As for Lucy, all the story about Rosa Elsworthy, of which she had not yet heard the last chapter, rushed back upon her mind. Was it to see little Rosa’s lover that she had come out of the darkness of her room, with a natural longing for sympathy which it was impossible to restrain? The tenderness of the instinctive feeling which had moved her, went back upon her heart in bitterness. That he must have divined why she had come, and scorned her for it, was the mildest supposition in Lucy’s mind. She could almost have imagined that he had come on purpose to elicit this vain exhibition of regard, and triumph over it; all this, too, when she was in such great trouble and sorrow, and wanted a little compassion, a little kindness, so much. This was the state of mind to which Lucy had come, in five minutes after she entered the room, when Miss Wodehouse came back with the letter. The elder sister was almost as much astonished at Lucy’s presence as if she had been the dead inhabitant who kept such state in the darkened house. She was so startled that she went back a step or two when she perceived her, and hastily put the letter in her pocket, and exclaimed her sister’s name in a tone most unlike Miss Wodehouse’s natural voice.</p>
			<p>“I came downstairs because⁠—I mean they told me <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was here,” said Lucy, who had never felt so weak and so miserable in her life, “and I wanted to thank him for all his kindness.” It was here for the first time that Lucy broke down. Her sorrow was so great, her longing for a word of kindness had been so natural, and her shame and self-condemnation at the very thought that she was able to think of anything but her father, were so bitter, that the poor girl’s forces, weakened by watching, were not able to withstand them. She sank into the chair that stood nearest, and covered her face with her hands, and cried as people cry only at twenty. And as for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, he had no right to take her in his arms and comfort her, nor to throw himself at her feet and entreat her to take courage. All he could do was to stand half a yard, yet a whole world, apart looking at her, his heart beating with all the remorseful half-angry tenderness of love. Since it was not his to console her, he was almost impatient of her tears.</p>
			<p>“Dear, I have been telling <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth about tomorrow,” said Miss Wodehouse, weeping too, as was natural, “and he thinks⁠—he thinks⁠—oh, my darling! and so do I⁠—that it will be too much for you. When I was young it never was the custom; and oh, Lucy, remember that ladies are not to be expected to have such command over their feelings,” said poor Miss Wodehouse, dropping on her knees by Lucy’s chair. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth stood looking on in a kind of despair. He had nothing to say, and no right to say anything; even his presence was a kind of intrusion. But to be referred to thus as an authority against Lucy’s wishes, vexed him in the most unreasonable way.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth does not know me,” said Lucy, under her breath, wiping away her tears with a trembling, indignant hand. “If we had had a brother, it might have been different; but there must be somebody there that loves him,” said the poor girl, with a sob, getting up hastily from her chair. She could not bear to stay any longer in the room, which she had entered with a vague sense of possible consolation. As for the Curate, he made haste to open the door for her, feeling the restraint of his position almost intolerable. “<em>I</em> shall be there,” he said, stopping at the door to look into the fair, pallid face which Lucy would scarcely raise to listen. “Could you not trust <em>me</em>?” It looked like giving him a pledge of something sacred and precious to put her hand into his, which was held out for it so eagerly. But Lucy could not resist the softening of nature; and not even Miss Wodehouse, looking anxiously after them, heard what further words they were that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth said in her ear. “I am for your service, however and wherever you want me,” said the Curate, with a young man’s absolutism. Heaven knows he had enough to do with his own troubles; but he remembered no obstacle which could prevent him from dedicating all his time and life to her as he spoke. When Lucy reached her own room, she threw herself upon the sofa, and wept like a woman inconsolable; but it was somehow because this consolation, subtle and secret, had stolen into her heart that her tears flowed so freely. And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth returned to her sister relieved, he could not have told why. At all events, come what might, the two had drawn together again in their mutual need.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, how can I cross her?” said Miss Wodehouse, wringing her hands. “If we had a brother⁠—did you hear what she said? Here is his letter, and I hope you will tell me candidly what you think. If we could trust him⁠—if we could but trust him! I daresay you think me very changeable and foolish; but now we are alone,” said the poor lady, “think what a comfort it would be if he only would change his ways as he promised! Lucy is a great deal more use than I am, and understands things; but still we are only two women,” said the elder sister. “If you think we could put any dependence upon him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, I would never hesitate. He might live with us, and have his little allowance.” Miss Wodehouse paused, and raised her anxious face to the Curate, pondering the particulars of the liberality she intended. “He is not a boy,” she went on. “I daresay now he must feel the want of the little comforts he once was used to; and though he is not like what he used to be, neither in his looks nor his manners, people would be kind to him for our sakes. Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, don’t you think we might trust him?” said the anxious woman, looking in the Curate’s face.</p>
			<p>All this time <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with an impatience of her simplicity which it was difficult to restrain, was reading the letter, in which he perceived a very different intention from any divined by Miss Wodehouse. The billet was disreputable enough, written in pencil, and without any date.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Mary</b>⁠—I mean to come to my father’s funeral,</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">wrote <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s disowned son.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p class="continued">Things are changed now, as I said they would be. I and a friend of mine have set everything straight with Waters, and I mean to come in my own name, and take the place I have a right to. How it is to be after this depends on how you behave; but things are changed between you and me, as I told you they would be; and I expect you won’t do anything to make ’em worse by doing or saying what’s unpleasant. I add no more, because I hope you’ll have sense to see what I mean, and to act accordingly.⁠—<span epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your brother,</span></p>
				<footer role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Thomas Wodehouse.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“You see he thinks I will reproach him,” said Miss Wodehouse, anxiously; perhaps it had just glanced across her own mind that something more important still might have dictated language so decided. “He has a great deal more feeling than you would suppose, poor fellow! It is very touching in him to say, ‘the place he has a right to’⁠—don’t you think so, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth? Poor Tom! if we could but trust him, and he would change his ways as he promised! Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, don’t you think I might speak of it to him tomorrow? If we could⁠—bury⁠—everything⁠—in dear papa’s grave,” cried the poor lady, once more breaking down. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth took no notice of Miss Wodehouse’s tears. They moved him with sentiments entirely different from those with which he regarded Lucy’s. He read the note over again without any attempt to console her, till she had struggled back into composure; but even then there was nothing sympathetic in the Curate’s voice.</p>
			<p>“And I think you told me you did not know anything about the will?” he said, with some abruptness, making no account whatever of the suggestion she had made.</p>
			<p>“No,” said Miss Wodehouse; “but my dear father was a business man, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, and I feel quite sure⁠—quite⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the Perpetual Curate; “nor of the nature of his property, perhaps?” added the worldly-minded young man whom poor Miss Wodehouse had chosen for her adviser. It was more than the gentle woman could bear.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, you know I am not one to understand,” cried the poor lady. “You ask me questions, but you never tell me what you think I should do. If it were only for myself, I would not mind, but I have to act for Lucy,” said the elder sister, suddenly sitting upright and drying her tears. “Papa, I am sure, did what was best for us,” she said, with a little gentle dignity, which brought the Curate back to his senses; “but oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, look at the letter, and tell me, for my sister’s sake, what am I to do?”</p>
			<p>The Curate went to the window, from which the sunshine was stealing away, to consider the subject; but he did not seem to derive much additional wisdom from that sacred spot, where Lucy’s worktable stood idle. “We must wait and see,” he said to himself. When he came back to Miss Wodehouse, and saw the question still in her eyes, it only brought back his impatience. “My dear Miss Wodehouse, instead of speculating about what is to happen, it would be much better to prepare your sister for the discovery she must make tomorrow,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth; “I cannot give any other advice, for my part. I think it is a great pity that you have kept it concealed so long. I beg your pardon for speaking so abruptly, but I am afraid you don’t know all the trouble that is before you. We are all in a great deal of trouble,” said the Perpetual Curate, with a little unconscious solemnity. “I can’t say I see my way through it; but you ought to prepare her⁠—to see⁠—her brother.” He said the words with a degree of repugnance which he could not conceal, and which wounded his companion’s tender heart.</p>
			<p>“He was so different when he was young,” said Miss Wodehouse, with a suppressed sob⁠—“he was a favourite everywhere. You would not have looked so if you had known him then. Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, promise me that you will not turn your back upon him if he comes home, after all your kindness. I will tell Lucy how much you have done for him,” said Miss Wodehouse. She was only half-conscious of her own gentle artifice. She took the Curate’s hand in both her own before he left her, and said it was such a comfort to have his advice to rely upon; and she believed what she said, though <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth himself knew better. The poor lady sat down in Lucy’s chair, and had a cry at her ease after he went away. She was to tell Lucy⁠—but how? and she sat pondering this hard question till all the light had faded out of the room, and the little window which was not shuttered dispersed only a grey twilight through the empty place. The lamp, meantime, had been lighted in the little parlour where Lucy sat, very sad, in her black dress, with <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">In Memoriam</i> on the table by her, carrying on a similar strain in her heart. She was thinking of the past, so many broken scenes of which kept flashing up before her, all bright with indulgent love and tenderness⁠—and she was thinking of the next day, when she was to see all that remained of her good father laid in his grave. He was not very wise nor remarkable among men, but he had been the tenderest father to the child of his old age; and in her heart she was praying for him still, pausing now and then to think whether it was right. The tears were heavy in her young eyes, but they were natural tears, and Lucy had no more thought that there was in the world anything sadder than sorrow, or that any complications lay in her individual lot, than the merest child in Prickett’s Lane. She thought of going back to the district, all robed and invested in the sanctity of her grief⁠—she thought it was to last forever, as one has the privilege of thinking when one is young; and it was to this young saint, tender towards all the world, ready to pity everybody, and to save a whole race, if that had been possible, that Miss Wodehouse went in, heavy and burdened, with her tale of miserable vice, unkindness, estrangement. How was it possible to begin? Instead of beginning, poor Miss Wodehouse, overpowered by her anxieties and responsibilities, was taken ill and fainted, and had to be carried to bed. Lucy would not let her talk when she came to herself; and so the only moment of possible preparation passed away, and the event itself, which one of them knew nothing of, and the other did not understand, came in its own person, without any <i xml:lang="fr">avant-couriers</i>, to open Lucy’s eyes once for all.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
