<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>
			<p>When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth entered <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s garden in the dark, his first glance up at the house showed him that a certain change had passed on it also. The decorous little house had been turned inside out. The windows of his own sitting-room were open, the blind drawn up to the top, and in addition to his usual lamp some candles were flaring wildly in the draught. He could see into the room as he paused at the garden-door, and was able to distinguish that the table was still covered as for dinner, and to catch the purple gleam of the light in the claret-jug which occupied the place of honour; but nobody was visible in the room. That wildly-illuminated and open apartment stood in strange contrast with the rest of the house, where everything was dark, save in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s own chamber. The Curate proceeded on his way, after that moment’s pause, with hasty and impatient steps. On the way up he encountered Sarah the housemaid, who stopped in the middle of the stairs to make a frightened little curtsy, and utter an alarmed “La!” of recognition and surprise. But Sarah turned round as soon as she had recovered herself, to say that her missis wanted very bad to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth as soon as he came home; but she was gone up to bed now, and didn’t he think it would be a pity to wake her up? The Curate gave her only a little nod of general acquiescence, as he hurried on; but felt, notwithstanding, that this prompt request, ready prepared for his arrival, was a tacit protest against his guests, and expression of disapproval. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin was only his landlady, an old woman, and not a particularly wise one, but her disapproval vexed the Perpetual Curate. It was a kind of sign of the times⁠—those times in which it appeared that everybody was ready to turn upon him and embarrass his path. He had forgotten all about his companion as he hurried into the familiar room which was so little like itself, but yet was somehow conscious with annoyance that the stranger followed him through its half-shut door. The scene within was one which was never effaced from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s memory. There were several bottles upon the table, which the poor Curate knew by sight, and which had been collected in his little cellar more for the benefit of Wharfside than of himself. Removed out of the current of air which was playing freely through the apartment, was someone lying on a sofa, with candles burning on a table beside him. He was in a dressing-gown, with his shirt open at the throat, and his languid frame extended in perfect repose to catch the refreshment of the breeze. Clouds of languid smoke, which were too far out of the way to feel the draught between the windows, curled over him: he had a cigar in one hand, which he had just taken from his lips, and with which he was faintly waving off a big night-moth which had been attracted by the lights; and a French novel, unmistakable in its paper cover, had closed upon the other. Altogether a more languid figure never lay at rest in undisturbed possession of the most legitimate retirement. He had the Wentworth hair, the golden-brown, which, like all their other family features, even down to their illnesses, the race was proud of, and a handsome silky beard. He had lived a hard life of pleasure and punishment; but though he had reached middle age, there was not a hair on the handsome reprobate’s head which had changed out of its original colour. He looked languidly up when the door opened, but did not stop the delicate fence which he was carrying on against the moth, nor the polyglot oaths which he was swearing at it softly half under his breath.</p>
			<p>“Frank, I suppose,” he said, calmly, as the Curate came hastily forward. “How d’ye do? I am very glad you’ve come back. The country was very charming the first day, but that’s a charm that doesn’t last. I suppose you’ve dined: or will you ring and order something?” he said, turning slowly round on his sofa. “Accidente! the thing will kill itself after all. Would you mind catching it in your handkerchief before you sit down? But don’t take away the candles. It’s too late to make any exertion,” said the elegant prodigal, leaning back languidly on his sofa; “but I assure you that light is half my life.”</p>
			<p>The Curate was tired, heated, and indignant. He lifted the candles away from the table, and then put them back again, too much excited to think of the moth. “Your arrival must have been very sudden,” he said, throwing himself into the nearest chair. “I was very much surprised by your message. It looks inhospitable, but I see you make yourself quite at home⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Perfectly,” said the elder brother, resuming his cigar. “I always do. It is much more agreeable for all parties. But I don’t know how it is that a man’s younger brothers are always so rapid and unreasonable in their movements. Instead of saving that unhappy insect, you have precipitated its fate. Poor thing⁠—and it had no soul,” said the intruder, with a tone of pathos. The scene altogether was a curious one. Snugly sheltered from the draught, but enjoying the coolness of the atmosphere which it produced, lay the figure on the sofa at perfect ease and leisure, with the light shed brightly upon him, on his shining beard, the white cool expanse of linen at his breast, and the bright hues of his dressing-gown. Near him, fatigued, dusty, indignant, and perplexed, sat the Curate, with the night air playing upon him, and moving his disordered hair on his forehead; while at the other end of the room hovered the stranger who had followed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth⁠—a broad, shabby, indistinct figure, who stood with his back to the others, looking vaguely out of the window into the darkness. Over these two the night air blew with no small force between the open windows, making the candles on the centre table flare wildly, and flapping the white tablecloth. An occasional puff from the cigar floated now and then across the room. It was a pause before the storm.</p>
			<p>“I was about to say,” said the Perpetual Curate, “that though it might seem inhospitable, the first thing I had to ask was, What brought you here⁠—and why did you send for me?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be abrupt, pray,” said Jack, taking his cigar from his mouth, and slightly waving the hand that held it. “Don’t let us plunge into business all at once. You bring a sense of fatigue into the room with you, and the atmosphere was delightful a little while ago. I flatter myself I know how to enjoy the cool of the evening. Suppose you were to⁠—ah⁠—refresh yourself a little,” he said, with a disapproving glance at his brother’s dusty boots, “before we begin to talk of our affairs.”</p>
			<p>The Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s got up from his chair, feeling that he had an unchristian inclination to kick the heir of the Wentworths. As he could not do that, he shut the window behind him emphatically, and extinguished the flaring candles on the centre table. “I detest a draught,” said the Perpetual Curate, which, unfortunately, was not a statement entirely founded on fact, though so far true in the present instance that he hated anything originated by the intruder. “I have hurried home in reply to your message, and I should be glad to know what it means, now that I am here⁠—what you are in trouble about⁠—and why you come to me⁠—and what you have to do with him?”</p>
			<p>“But you need not have deranged the temperature,” said Jack. “Impetuosity always distresses me. All these are questions which it will take some time to answer. Let me persuade you, in the first place, to make yourself comfortable. Don’t mind me; I am at the crisis of my novel, which is very interesting. I have just been thinking how it might be adapted for the stage⁠—there’s a character that Fechter could make anything of. Now, my dear fellow, don’t stand on ceremony. Take a bath and change your dress, and in the meantime there will be time to cook something⁠—the cookery here is not bad for the country. After that we’ll discuss all our news. I daresay our friend there is in no hurry,” said the elder brother, opening his book and puffing slowly towards the Curate the languid smoke of his cigar.</p>
			<p>“But, by Jove, I <em>am</em> in a hurry, though,” said that nameless individual, coming forward. “It’s all very well for you: you put a man up to everything that’s dangerous, and then you leave him in the lurch, and say it don’t matter. I daresay it don’t matter to you. All that you’ve done has been to share the profit⁠—you’ve nothing to do with the danger; but I’m savage tonight, and I don’t mean to stand it any more,” said the stranger, his great chest expanding with a panting breath. He, too, looked as if he would have liked to seize the languid spectator in his teeth and shake some human feeling into him. Jack Wentworth raised his eyebrows and looked at him, as he might have looked at a wild beast in a rage.</p>
			<p>“Sit down, savage, and be quiet,” he said. “Why should I trouble myself about you?⁠—any fool could get into your scrape. I am not in the habit of interfering in a case of common crime. What I do, I do out of pity,” he continued, with an air of superiority, quite different from his tone to his brother. But this look, which had answered before, was not successful tonight.</p>
			<p>“By Jove, I <em>am</em> savage!” said the other, setting his teeth, “and I know enough of your ways to teach you different behaviour. The parson has treated me like a gentleman⁠—like what I used to be, though he don’t like me; but you!⁠—By Jove! It was only my own name I signed, after all,” he continued, after a pause, lowering his voice; “but you, you blackleg⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Stop a little,” said the Curate, rising up. “Though you seem both to have forgotten it, this is my room. I don’t mean to have any altercations here. I have taken you in for the sake of your⁠—family,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with a momentary gasp, “and you have come because you are my brother. I don’t deny any natural claims upon me; but I am master of my own house and my own leisure. Get up, Jack, and tell me what you want. When I understand what it is, you can lounge at your will; but in the meantime get up and explain: and as for you, Wodehouse⁠—”</p>
			<p>Jack Wentworth faced round on his sofa, and then, with a kind of involuntary motion, slid his feet to the ground. He looked at his brother with extreme amazement as he closed his novel and tossed away the end of his cigar. “It’s much better not to mention names,” he said, in a half-apologetic way. “Our friend here is under a temporary cloud. His name, in fact, is⁠—Smith, I think.” But as he spoke he sat upright, a little startled to find that Frank, whom he remembered only as a lad, was no longer to be coerced and concussed. As for the other, he came forward with the alacrity of a man who began to see some hope.</p>
			<p>“By Jove, my name <em>is</em> Wodehouse, though,” he said, in the argumentative tone which seemed habitual to him; his voice came low and grumbling through his beard. He was not of the class of triumphant sinners, whatever wickedness he might be capable of. To tell the truth, he had long, long ago fallen out of the butterfly stage of dissipation, and had now to be the doer of dirty work, despised and hustled about by such men as Jack Wentworth. The wages of sin had long been bitter enough, though he had neither any hope of freeing himself, nor any wish to do so; but he took up a grumbling tone of self-assertion as soon as he had an opening. “The parson treats me like a gentleman⁠—like what I used to be,” he repeated, coming into the light, and drawing a chair towards the table. “My name is Wodehouse⁠—it’s my own name that I have signed after all, by Jove!” said the unlucky prodigal. It seemed to give him a little comfort to say that over again, as if to convince himself.</p>
			<p>“As for Wodehouse, I partly understand what he has done,” said the Curate. “It appears likely that he has killed his father, by the way; but I suppose you don’t count that. It is forgery in the meantime; I understand as much.”</p>
			<p>“It’s my name as well as his, by Jove!” interrupted, hastily, the stranger, under his breath.</p>
			<p>“Such strong terms are unnecessary,” said Jack; “everybody knows that bills are drawn to be renewed, and nursed, and taken care of. We’ve had a great failure in luck as it happens, and these ones have come down to this deuced place; and the old fellow, instead of paying them like a gentleman, has made a row, and dropped down dead, or something. I suppose you don’t know any more than the women have told you. The old man made a row in the office, and went off in fire and flame, and gave up our friend here to his partner’s tender mercies. I sent for you, as you’ve taken charge of him. I suppose you have your reasons. This is an unlikely corner to find him in, and I suppose he couldn’t be safer anywhere. That’s about the state of the case. I came down to look after him, out of kind feeling,” said the heir of the Wentworths. “If you don’t mean to eat any dinner, have a cigar.”</p>
			<p>“And what have you to do with each other? what is the connection between you?” said the Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s. “I have my reasons, as you say, for taking an interest in him⁠—but you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I am only your elder brother,” said Jack, shrugging his shoulders and resuming his place on the sofa. “We understand that difference. Business connection⁠—that’s all,” he said, leisurely selecting another cigar from his case. When he had lighted it, he turned round and fixed his eyes upon the stranger. “We don’t want any harm to happen to him,” he said, with a little emphasis. “I have come here to protect him. If he keeps quiet and doesn’t show, it will blow over. The keenest spy in the place could scarcely suspect him to be here. I have come entirely on his account⁠—much to my own disgust⁠—and yours,” said the exquisite, with another shrug. He laid back his head and looked up at the ceiling, contemplating the fragrant wreaths of smoke with the air of a man perfectly at his ease. “We don’t mean him to come to any harm,” said Jack Wentworth, and stretched out his elegant limbs on the sofa, like a potentate satisfied that his protection was enough to make any man secure.</p>
			<p>“I’m too much in their secrets, by Jove!” said poor Wodehouse, in his beard. “I <em>do</em> know their secrets, though they talk so big. It’s not any consideration for me. It’s to save themselves, by Jove, that’s what it is!” cried the indignant drudge, of whom his superior deigned to take no notice. As for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, he rose from his seat in a state of suppressed indignation, which could not express itself merely in words.</p>
			<p>“May I ask what share I am expected to play in the drama?” he asked, pushing his chair aside in his excitement. The elder brother turned instinctively, and once more slid his feet to the ground. They looked at each other for a moment; the Curate, pale with a passion which he could not conceal, had something in his eyes which brought shame even to Jack Wentworth’s face.</p>
			<p>“You can betray him if you like,” he said, sulkily. “I have no⁠—particular interest in the matter; but in that case he had better make the best of his time and get away. You hear?” said the master-spirit, making a sign to Wodehouse. He had roused himself up, and looked now like a feline creature preparing for a spring⁠—his eyes were cast down, but under the eyelids he followed his brother’s movements with vigilant observation. “If you like, you can betray him,” he repeated, slowly, understanding, as bad men so often do, the generosities of the nature to which his own was so much opposed.</p>
			<p>And perhaps there was an undue degree of exasperation in the indignant feelings which moved <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. He kicked off his dusty boots with an indecorum quite unusual to him, and hunted up his slippers out of the adjoining room with perhaps an unnecessary amount of noise and haste. Then he went and looked out of the window into the serene summer darkness and the dewy garden, getting a little fresh air upon his heated face. Last of all he came back, peremptory and decided. “I shall not betray him,” said the Perpetual Curate; “but I will have no further schemes concocted nor villany carried on in my house. If I consent to shield him, and, if possible, save him from the law, it is neither for his sake⁠—nor yours,” said the indignant young man. “I suppose it is no use saying anything about your life; but both of you have fathers very like to die of this⁠—”</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow,” said Jack Wentworth, “we have gone through that phase ages ago. Don’t be so much after date. I have brought down my father’s grey hairs, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, a hundred times; and, I daresay, so has he. Don’t treat us as if we were in the nursery⁠—a parson of advanced views like you should have something a little more novel to say.”</p>
			<p>“And so I have,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with a heightened colour. “There are capital rooms at the Blue Boar, which you will find very comfortable, I am sure. I don’t remember that we have ever been more than acquaintances; and to take possession of a man’s house in his absence argues a high degree of friendship, as you are aware. It will be with difficulty that I shall find room for myself tonight; but tomorrow, I trust, if business requires you to remain in Carlingford, you will be able to find accommodation at the Blue Boar.”</p>
			<p>The elder brother grew very red all over his face. “I will go at once,” he said, with a little start; and then he took a second thought. “It is a poor sort of way of winning a victory,” he said, in contemptuous tones, after he had overcome his first impulse; “but if you choose that, it is no matter to me. I’ll go tomorrow, as you say⁠—to pack up tonight is too much for my energies. In the meantime it won’t disturb you, I hope, if I go on with my novel. I don’t suppose any further civilities are necessary between you and me,” said Jack, once more putting up his feet on the sofa. He arranged himself with an indifference which was too genuine for bravado, opening his book, and puffing his cigar with great coolness. He did all but turn his back upon the others, and drew the little table nearer to him, in utter disregard of the fact that the Curate was leaning his arm on it. In short, he retired from the contest with a kind of grandeur, with his cigar and his novel, and the candles which lighted him up placidly, and made him look like the master of the house and the situation. There was a pause for some minutes, during which the others looked on⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth with a perfectly unreasonable sense of defeat, and poor Wodehouse with that strange kind of admiration which an unsuccessful good-for-nothing naturally feels for a triumphant rascal. They were in the shade looking on, and he in the light enjoying himself calmly in his way. The sight put an end to various twinges of repentance in the bosom of the inferior sinner. Jack Wentworth, lying on the sofa in superb indifference, victorious over all sense of right, did more to confirm his humble admirer in the life which he had almost made up his mind to abandon, than even his own inclination towards forbidden pleasure. He was dazzled by the success of his principal; and in comparison with that instructive sight, his father’s probable deathbed, his sisters’ tears, and even his own present discomfort, faded into insignificance. What Jack Wentworth was, Tom Wodehouse could never be; but at least he could follow his great model humbly and afar off. These sentiments made him receive but sulkily the admonitions of the Curate, when he led the way out of the preoccupied sitting-room; for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was certainly not the victor in this passage of arms.</p>
			<p>“I will do what I can to help you out of this,” said the Curate, pausing within the door of Wodehouse’s room, “for the sake of your⁠—friends. But look here, Wodehouse; I have not preached to you hitherto, and I don’t mean to do so now. When a man has done a crime, he is generally past preaching. The law will punish you for forging your father’s name⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It’s <em>my</em> name as well as his, by Jove!” interrupted the culprit, sullenly; “I’ve a right to sign it wherever I please.”</p>
			<p>“But the law,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with emphasis, “has nothing to do with the breaking of your father’s heart. If he dies, think whether the recollection will be a comfortable one. I will save you, if I can, and there is time, though I am compromised already, and it may do me serious injury. If you get free and are cleared from this, will you go away and break off your connection with⁠—yes, you are quite right⁠—I mean with my brother, whatever the connection may be? I will only exert myself for you on condition that you promise. You will go away somehow, and break off your old habits, and try if it is possible to begin anew?”</p>
			<p>Wodehouse paused before he answered. The vision of Jack in the Curate’s sitting-room still dazzled him. “You daren’t say as much to your brother as you say to me,” he replied, after a while, in his sulky way; “but I’m a gentleman, by Jove, as well as he is.” And he threw himself down in a chair, and bit his nails, and grumbled into his beard. “It’s hard to ask a fellow to give up his liberty,” he said, without lifting his eyes. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, perhaps, was a little contemptuous of the sullen wretch who already had involved him in so much annoyance and trouble.</p>
			<p>“You can take your choice,” he said; “the law will respect your liberty less than I shall;” and all the Curate’s self-control could not conceal a certain amount of disdain.</p>
			<p>“By Jove!” said Wodehouse, lifting up his eyes, “if the old man should die, you’d change your tone;” and then he stopped short and looked suspiciously at the Curate. “There’s no will, and I’m the heir,” he said, with sullen braggadocio. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was still young, and this look made him sick with disgust and indignation.</p>
			<p>“Then you can take your chance,” he said, impatiently, making a hasty step to the door. He would not return, though his ungrateful guest called him back, but went away, much excited and disgusted, to see if the fresh air outside would restore his composure. On his way downstairs, he again met Sarah, who was hovering about in a restless state of curiosity. “I’ve made a bed for you, please, sir, in the little dressing-room,” said Sarah; “and, please, Cook wants to know, wouldn’t you have anything to eat?” The question reminded <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth that he had eaten nothing since luncheon, which he took in his father’s house. Human nature, which can bear great blows with elasticity so wonderful, is apt to be put out, as everybody knows, by their most trifling accessories, and a man naturally feels miserable when he had had no dinner, and has not a place to shelter him while he snatches a necessary mouthful. “Never mind; all the rooms are occupied tonight,” said the Perpetual Curate, feeling thoroughly wretched. But Cook and Sarah had arranged all that, being naturally indignant that their favourite clergyman should be put “upon” by his disorderly and unexpected guests.</p>
			<p>“I have set your tray, sir, in missis’s parlour,” said Sarah, opening the door to that sanctuary; and it is impossible to describe the sense of relief with which the Perpetual Curate flung himself down on <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s sofa, deranging a quantity of cushions and elaborate crochet-work draperies without knowing it. Here at least he was safe from intrusion. But his reflections were far from being agreeable as he ate his beefsteak. Here he was, without any fault of his own, plunged into the midst of a complication of disgrace and vice. Perhaps already the name of Lucy Wodehouse was branded with her brother’s shame; perhaps still more overwhelming infamy might overtake, through that means, the heir and the name of the Wentworths. And for himself, what he had to do was to attempt with all his powers to defeat justice, and save from punishment a criminal for whom it was impossible to feel either sympathy or hope. When he thought of Jack upstairs on the sofa over his French novel, the heart of the Curate burned within him with indignation and resentment; and his disgust at his other guest was, if less intense, an equally painful sensation. It was hard to waste his strength, and perhaps compromise his character, for such men as these; but on the other hand he saw his father, with that malady of the Wentworths hanging over his head, doing his best to live and last, like a courageous English gentleman as he was, for the sake of “the girls” and the little children, who had so little to expect from Jack; and poor stupid <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse dying of the crime which assailed his own credit as well as his son’s safety. The Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s drew a long breath, and raised himself up unconsciously to his full height as he rose to go upstairs. It was he against the world at the moment, as it appeared. He set himself to his uncongenial work with a heart that revolted against the evil cause of which he was about to constitute himself the champion. But for the Squire, who had misjudged him⁠—for Lucy who had received him with such icy smiles, and closed up her heart against his entrance;⁠—sometimes there is a kind of bitter sweetness in the thought of spending love and life in one lavish and prodigal outburst upon those to whom our hearts are bound, but whose affections make us no return.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
