<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>
			<p>The Curate got up very early next morning. He had his sermon to write and it was Saturday, and all the events of the week had naturally enough unsettled his mind, and indisposed him for sermon-writing. When the events of life come fast upon a man, it is seldom that he finds much pleasure in abstract literary composition, and the style of the Curate of St. Roque’s was not of that hortatory and impassioned character which sometimes gives as much relief to the speaker as excitement to the audience. So he got up in the early sweetness of the summer morning, when nobody but himself was astir in the house, with the sense of entering upon a task, and taking up work which was far from agreeable to him. When he came into the little room which he used as a study, and threw the window open, and breathed the delicious air of the morning, which was all thrilling and trembling with the songs of birds, Mr. Wentworth’s thoughts were far from being concentrated upon any one subject. He sat down at his writing-table and arranged his pens and paper, and wrote down the text he had selected; and when he had done so much, and could feel that he had made a beginning, he leaned back in his chair, and poised the idle pen on his finger, and abandoned himself to his thoughts. He had so much to think about. There was Wodehouse under the same roof, with whom he had felt himself constrained to remonstrate very sharply on the previous night. There was Jack, so near, and certainly come to Carlingford on no good errand. There was Gerald, in his great perplexity and distress, and the household at home in their anxiety; and last, but worst of all, his fancy would go fluttering about the doors of the sick chamber in Grange Lane, longing and wondering. He asked himself what it could be which had raised that impalpable wall between Lucy and himself⁠—that barrier too strong to be overthrown, too ethereal to be complained of; and wondered over and over again what her thoughts were towards him⁠—whether she thought of him at all, whether she was offended, or simply indifferent?⁠—a question which any one else who had observed Lucy as closely could have solved without any difficulty, but which, to the modest and true love of the Perpetual Curate, was at present the grand doubt of all the doubts in the universe. With this matter to settle, and with the consciousness that it was still only five o’clock, and that he was at least one hour beforehand with the world, it is easy to understand why Mr. Wentworth mused and loitered over his work, and how, when it was nearly six o’clock, and Sarah and the cook were beginning to stir from their sleep, there still remained only the text written upon the sermon-paper, which was so nicely arranged before him on the table. “When the wicked man turneth away from the evil of his ways, and doeth that which is lawful and right.”⁠—This was the text; but sitting at the open window, looking out into the garden, where the birds, exempt, as they seemed to think, for once from the vulgar scrutiny of man, were singing at the pitch of all their voices as they prepared for breakfast; and where the sweet air of the morning breathed into his mind a freshness and hopefulness which youth can never resist, and seduced his thoughts away from all the harder problems of his life to dwell upon the sweeter trouble of that doubt about Lucy⁠—was not the best means of getting on with his work. He sat thus leaning back⁠—sometimes dipping his pen in the ink, and hovering over the paper for two or three seconds at a time, sometimes reading over the words, and making a faint effort to recall his own attention to them; for, on the whole, perhaps, it is not of much use getting up very early in the morning when the chief consequence of it is, that a man feels he has an hour to spare, and a little time to play before he begins.</p>
			<p>Mr. Wentworth was still lingering in this peaceful pause, when he heard, in the stillness, hasty steps coming down Grange Lane. No doubt it was some workmen going to their work, and he felt it must be nearly six o’clock, and dipped his pen once more in the ink; but, the next moment, paused again to listen, feeling in his heart a strange conviction that the steps would stop at his door, and that something was going to happen. He was sure of it, and yet somehow the sound tingled upon his heart when he heard the bell ring, waking up echoes in the silent house. Cook and Sarah had not yet given any signs of coming down-stairs, and nobody stirred even at the sound of the bell. Mr. Wentworth put down his pen altogether, and listened with an anxiety which he could scarcely account for⁠—knowing, as he said to himself, that it must be the milk, or the baker, or somebody. But neither the milk nor the baker would have dared to knock, and shake, and kick the door as the new arrivals were doing. Mr. Wentworth sat still as long as he could, then he added to the din they were making outside by an indignant ring of his own bell; and finally getting anxious, as was natural, and bethinking himself of his father’s attack and Mr. Wodehouse’s illness, the Curate took the matter into his own hands, and hastened down-stairs to open the door. Mrs. Hadwin called to him as he passed her room, thinking it was Sarah, and begging for goodness gracious sake to know directly what was the matter; and he felt himself growing agitated as he drew back the complicated bolts, and turned the key in the door, which was elaborately defenced, as was natural. When he hurried out into the garden, the songs of the birds and the morning air seemed to have changed their character. He thought he was about to be summoned to the deathbed of one or other of the old men upon whom their sons had brought such misery. He was but little acquainted with the fastenings of the garden-door, and fumbled a little over them in his anxiety. “Wait a moment and you shall be admitted,” he called out to those outside, who still continued to knock; and he fancied, even in the haste and confusion of the moment, that his voice caused some little commotion among them. Mr. Wentworth opened the door, looking anxiously out for some boy with a telegram, or other such mournful messenger; but to his utter amazement was nearly knocked down by the sudden plunge of Elsworthy, who entered with a spring like that of a wild animal, and whose face looked white and haggard as he rushed in. He came against the Curate so roughly as to drive him a step or two farther into the garden, and naturally aroused somewhat sharply the temper of the young man, who had already begun to regard him with disagreeable sensations as a kind of spy against himself.</p>
			<p>“What in the world do you want at such an early hour in the morning?” cried Mr. Wentworth⁠—“and what do you mean by making such a noise? Is Mr. Wodehouse worse? or what has happened?” for, to tell the truth, he was a little relieved to find that the two people outside both belonged to Carlingford, and that nowhere was there any visible apparition of a telegraph boy.</p>
			<p>“Don’t trifle with me, Mr. Wentworth,” said Elsworthy. “I’m a poor man; but a worm as is trodden on turns. I want my child, sir!⁠—give me my child. I’ll find her out if it was at the end of the world. I’ve only brought down my neighbour with me as I can trust,” he continued, hoarsely⁠—“to save both your characters. I don’t want to make no talk; if you do what is right by Rosa, neither me or him will ever say a word. I want Rosa, Mr. Wentworth. Where’s Rosa? If I had known as it was for this you wanted her home! But I’ll take my oath not to make no talk,” cried the clerk, with passion and earnestness, which confounded Mr. Wentworth⁠—“if you’ll promise to do what’s right by her, and let me take her home.”</p>
			<p>“Elsworthy, are you mad?” cried the Curate⁠—“is he out of his senses? Has anything happened to Rosa? For heaven’s sake, Hayles, don’t stand there like a man of wood, but tell me if the man’s crazy, or what he means.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll come in, sir, if you’ve no objection, and shut the door, not to make a talk,” said Elsworthy’s companion, Peter Hayles, the druggist. “If it can be managed without any gossip, it’ll be best for all parties,” said this worthy, shutting the door softly after him. “The thing is, where’s Rosa, Mr. Wentworth? I can’t think as you’ve got her here.”</p>
			<p>“She’s all the same as my own child!” cried Elsworthy, who was greatly excited. “I’ve had her and loved her since she was a baby. I don’t mean to say as I’d put myself forward to hurt her prospects if she was married in a superior line o’ life; but them as harms Rosa has me to reckon with,” he said, with a kind of fury which sat strangely on the man. “Mr. Wentworth, where’s the child? God forgive you both, you’ve given me a night o’ weeping; but if you’ll do what’s right by Rosa, and send her home in the mean time⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Be silent, sir!” cried the Curate. “I know nothing in the world about Rosa. How dare you venture to come on such an errand to me? I don’t understand how it is,” said the young man, growing red and angry, “that you try so persistently to connect this child with me. I have never had anything to do with her, and I will not submit to any such impertinent suspicion. Leave my house, sir, immediately, and don’t insult me by making such inquiries here.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Wentworth was very angry in the first flush of his wrath. He did not think what misery was involved in the question which had been addressed to him, nor did he see for the moment the terrible calamity to Rosa which was suggested by this search for her. He thought only of himself, as was natural, at the first shock⁠—of the injurious and insulting suspicion with which he seemed to be pursued, and of the annoyance which she and her friends were causing him. “What do you mean by rousing a whole household at this hour in the morning?” cried Mr. Wentworth, as he saw with vexation, Sarah, very startled and sleepy, come stealing round by the kitchen door.</p>
			<p>“You don’t look as if you had wanted any rousing,” said Elsworthy, who was too much in earnest to own the Curate’s authority. “She was seen at your door the last thing last night, and you’re in your clothes, as bright as day, and a-waiting for us afore six o’clock in the morning. Do you think as I’ve shut my eyes because it’s my clergyman?” cried the injured man, passionately. “I want my little girl⁠—my little Rosa⁠—as is flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone. If Mr. Wentworth didn’t know nothing about it, as he says,” cried Elsworthy, with sudden insight, “he has a feelin’ heart, and he’d be grieved about the child; but he aint grieved, nor concerned, nor nothing in the world but angry; and will you tell me there aint nothing to be drawn from that? But it’s far from my intention to raise a talk,” said the clerk, drawing closer and touching the arm of the Perpetual Curate; “let her come back, and if you’re a man of your word, and behave honourable by her, there shan’t be nothing said in Carlingford. I’ll stand up for you, sir, against the world.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Wentworth shook off his assailant’s hand with a mingled sense of exasperation and sympathy. “I tell you, upon my honour, I know nothing about her,” he said. “But it is true enough I have been thinking only of myself,” he continued, addressing the other. “How about the girl? When was she lost? and can’t you think of any place she can have gone to? Elsworthy, hear reason,” cried the Curate anxiously. “I assure you, on my word, that I have never seen her since I closed this garden-gate upon her last night.”</p>
			<p>“And I would ask you, sir, what had Rosa to do at your garden-gate?” cried the clerk of St. Roque’s. “He aint denying it, Hayles; you can see as he aint a-denying of it. What was it as she came here for but you? Mr. Wentworth, I’ve always had a great respect for you,” said Elsworthy. “I’ve respected you as my clergyman, sir, as well as for other things; but you’re a young man, and human nature is frail. I say again as you needn’t have no fear of me. I aint one as likes to make a talk, and no more is Hayles. Give up the girl, and give me your promise, and there aint a man living as will be the wiser; Mr. Wentworth⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Hold your tongue, sir!” cried the Curate, furious with indignation and resentment. “Leave this place instantly! If you don’t want me to pitch you into the middle of the road, hold your tongue and go away. The man is mad!” said Mr. Wentworth, turning towards the spectator, Hayles, and pausing to take breath. But it was evident that this third person was by no means on the Curate’s side.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know, sir, I’m sure,” said Hayles, with a blank countenance. “It appears to me, sir, as it’s an awkward business for all parties. Here’s the girl gone, and no one knows where. When a girl don’t come back to her own ’ome all night, things look serious, sir; and it has been said as the last place she was seen was at your door.”</p>
			<p>“Who says so?” cried Mr. Wentworth.</p>
			<p>“Well⁠—it was⁠—a party, sir⁠—a highly respectable party⁠—as I have good reason to believe,” said Hayles, “being a constant customer⁠—one as there’s every confidence to be put in. It’s better not to name no names, being at this period of the affair.”</p>
			<p>And at that moment, unluckily for Mr. Wentworth, there suddenly floated across his mind the clearest recollection of the Miss Hemmings, and the look they gave him in passing. He felt a hot flush rush over his face as he recalled it. They, then, were his accusers in the first place; and for the first time he began to realise how the tide of accusation would surge through Carlingford, and how circumstances would be patched together, and very plausible evidence concocted out of the few facts which were capable of an inference totally opposed to the truth. The blood rushed to his face in an overpowering glow, and then he felt the warm tide going back upon his heart, and realised the position in which he stood for the first time in its true light.</p>
			<p>“And if you’ll let me say it, sir,” said the judicious Hayles, “though a man may be in a bit of a passion, and speak more strong that is called for, it aint unnatural in the circumstances; things may be better than they appear,” said the druggist, mildly; “I don’t say nothing against that; it may be as you’ve took her away, sir (if so be as you have took her away), for to give her a bit of education, or suchlike, before making her your wife; but folks in general aint expected to know that; and when a young girl is kep’ out of her ’ome for a whole night, it aint wonderful if her friends take fright. It’s a sad thing for Rosa whoever’s taken her away, and wherever she is.”</p>
			<p>Now, Mr. Wentworth, notwithstanding the indignant state of mind which he was in, was emphatically of the tolerant temper which is so curiously characteristic of his generation. He could not be unreasonable even in his own cause; he was not partisan enough, even in his own behalf, to forget that there was another side to the question, nor to see how hard and how sad was that other side. He was moved in spite of himself to grieve over Rosa Elsworthy’s great misfortune.</p>
			<p>“Poor little deluded child,” he said, sadly; “I acknowledge it is very dreadful for her and for her friends. I can excuse a man who is mad with grief and wretchedness and anxiety, and doesn’t know what he is saying. As for any man in his senses imagining,” said the Curate again, with a flush of sudden colour, “that I could possibly be concerned in anything so base, that is simply absurd. When Elsworthy returns to reason, and acknowledges the folly of what he has said, I will do anything in the world to help him. It is unnecessary for you to wait,” said Mr. Wentworth, turning to Sarah, who had stolen up behind, and caught some of the conversation, and who was staring with round eyes of wonder, partly guessing, partly inquiring, what had happened⁠—“these people want me; go indoors and never mind.”</p>
			<p>“La, sir! Missis is a-ringing all the bells down to know what ‘as ‘appened,” said Sarah, holding her ground.</p>
			<p>This was how it was to be⁠—the name of the Curate of St. Roque’s was to be linked to that of Rosa Elsworthy, let the truth be what it might, in the mouths of every maid and every mistress in Carlingford. He was seized with a sudden apprehension of this aspect of the matter, and it was not wonderful if Mr. Wentworth drew his breath hard and set his teeth, as he ordered the woman away, in a tone which could not be disobeyed.</p>
			<p>“I don’t want to make no talk,” said Elsworthy, who during this time had made many efforts to speak; “I’ve sait it before, and I say it again⁠—it’s Mr. Wentworth’s fault if there’s any talk. She was seen here last night,” he went on rapidly, “and afore six o’clock this blessed morning, you, as are never known to be stirring early, meets us at the door, all shaved and dressed; and it aint very difficult to see, to them as watches the clergyman’s countenance,” said Elsworthy, turning from one to another, “as everything isn’t as straight as it ought to be; but I aint going to make no talk, Mr. Wentworth,” he went on, drawing closer, and speaking with conciliatory softness; “me and her aunt, sir, loves her dearly, but we’re not the folks to stand in her way, if a gentleman was to take a fancy to Rosa. If you’ll give me your word to make her your wife honourable, and tell me where she is, tortures wouldn’t draw no complaints from me. One moment, sir; it aint only that she’s pretty, but she’s good as well⁠—she won’t do you no discredit, Mr. Wentworth. Put her to school, or what you please, sir,” said Rosa’s uncle; “me and my wife will never interfere, so be as you make her your wife honourable; but I aint a worm to be trampled on,” cried Elsworthy, as the Curate, finding him approach very closely, thrust him away with vehement indignation; “I aint a slave to be pushed about. Them as brings Rosa to shame shall come to shame by me; I’ll ruin the man as ruins that child. You may turn me out,” he cried, as the Curate laid his powerful hand upon his shoulder and forced him towards the door, “but I’ll come back, and I’ll bring all Carlingford. There shan’t be a soul in the town as doesn’t know. Oh, you young viper, as I thought was a pious clergyman! you aint got rid of me. My child⁠—where’s my child?” cried the infuriated clerk, as he found himself ejected into the road outside, and the door suddenly closed upon him. He turned round to beat upon it in blind fury, and kept calling upon Rosa, and wasting his threats and arguments upon the calm air outside. Some of the maid-servants in the other houses came out, broom in hand, to the green doors, to see what was the matter, but they were not near enough to hear distinctly, and no early wayfarers had as yet invaded the morning quiet of Grange Lane.</p>
			<p>Mr. Wentworth, white with excitement, and terribly calm and self-possessed, turned to the amazed and trembling druggist, who still stood inside. “Look here, Hayles,” said the Curate; “I have never seen Rosa Elsworthy since I closed this door upon her last night. What had brought her here I don’t know⁠—at least she came with no intention of seeing me⁠—and I reproved her sharply for being out so late. This is all I know about the affair, and all I intend to say to any one. If that idiot outside intends to make a disturbance, he must do it; I shall take no further trouble to clear myself of such an insane accusation. I think it right to say as much to you, because you seem to have your senses about you,” said the Curate, pausing, out of breath. He was perfectly calm, but it was impossible to ignore the effect of such a scene upon ordinary flesh and blood. His heart was beating loudly, and his breath came short and quick. He turned away and walked up to the house-door, and then came back again. “You understand me, I suppose?” he said; “and if Elsworthy is not mad, you had better suggest to him not to lose his only chance of recovering Rosa by vain bluster with me, who know nothing about her. I shan’t be idle in the mean time,” said Mr. Wentworth. All this time Elsworthy was beating against the door, and shouting his threats into the quiet of the morning; and Mrs. Hadwin had thrown up her window, and stood there visibly in her nightcap, trying to find out what the noise was about, and trembling for the respectability of her house⁠—all which the Curate apprehended with that extraordinary swiftness and breadth of perception which comes to men at the eventful moments of life.</p>
			<p>“I’ll do my best, sir,” said Hayles, who felt that his honour was appealed to; “but it’s an awkward business for all parties, that’s what it is;” and the druggist backed out in a state of great bewilderment, having a little struggle at the door with Elsworthy to prevent his re-entrance. “There aint nothing to be got out of <i>him</i>,” said Mr. Hayles, as he succeeded at last in leading his friend away. Such was the conclusion of Mr. Wentworth’s morning studies, and the sermon which was to have been half written before breakfast upon that eventful Saturday. He went back to the house, as was natural, with very different thoughts in his mind.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
