<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>Meanwhile Mr. Wentworth, without much thought of his sins, went down George Street, meaning to turn off at the first narrow turning which led down behind the shops and traffic, behind the comfort and beauty of the little town, to that inevitable land of shadow which always dogs the sunshine. Carlingford proper knew little about it, except that it increased the poor-rates, and now and then produced a fever. The minister of Salem Chapel was in a state of complete ignorance on the subject. The late Rector had been equally uninformed. Mr. Bury, who was Evangelical, had the credit of disinterring the buried creatures there about thirty years ago. It was an office to be expected of that much-preaching man; but what was a great deal more extraordinary, was to find that the only people now in Carlingford who knew anything about Wharfside, except overseers of the poor and guardians of the public peace, were the Perpetual Curate of St. Roque’s⁠—who had nothing particular to do with it, and who was regarded by many sober-minded persons with suspicion as a dilettante Anglican, given over to floral ornaments and ecclesiastical upholstery⁠—and some half-dozen people of the very <i>élite</i> of society, principally ladies residing in Grange Lane.</p>
			<p>Mr. Wentworth came to a hesitating pause at the head of the turning which would have led him to Wharfside. He looked at his watch and saw there was half an hour to spare. He gave a wistful lingering look down the long line of garden-walls, pausing upon one point where the blossomed boughs of an apple-tree overlooked that enclosure.</p>
			<p>There was quite time to call and ask if the Miss Wodehouses were going down to the service this afternoon; but was it duty? or, indeed, putting that question aside, was it quite right to compound matters with his own heart’s desire and the work he was engaged in, in this undeniable fashion? The young priest crossed the street very slowly, swinging his cane and knitting his brows as he debated the question. If it had been one of the bargemen bringing his sweetheart, walking with her along the side of the canal to which Spring and sweet Easter coming on, and Love, perhaps, always helpful of illusions, might convey a certain greenness and sentiment of nature⁠—and echoing her soft responses to the afternoon prayers⁠—perhaps the Curate might have felt that such devotion was not entirely pure and simple. But somehow, before he was aware of it, his slow footstep had crossed the line, and he found himself in Grange Lane, bending his steps towards Mr. Wodehouse’s door. For one thing, to be sure, the Canticles in the evening service could always be sung when Lucy’s sweet clear voice was there to lead the uncertain melody; and it was good to see her singing the ‘Magnificat’ with that serious sweet face, “full of grace,” like Mary’s own. Thinking of that, Mr. Wentworth made his way without any further hesitation to the green door over which hung the apple-blossoms, totally untroubled in his mind as to what the reverend pair were thinking whom he had left behind him in the ugly church; and unconscious that his impromptu chapel at Wharfside, with its little carved reading-desk, and the table behind, contrived so as to look suspiciously like an altar, was a thorn in anybody’s side. Had his mind been in a fit condition at that moment to cogitate trouble, his thoughts would have travelled in a totally different direction, but in the mean time Mr. Wentworth was very well able to put aside his perplexities. The green door opened just as he reached it, and Lucy and her elder sister came out in those grey cloaks which the Rector had slandered. They were just going to Wharfside to the service, and of course they were surprised to see Mr. Wentworth, who did not knock at that green door more than a dozen times in a week, on the average. The Curate walked between the sisters on their way towards their favourite “district.” Such a position would scarcely have been otherwise than agreeable to any young man. Dear old Miss Wodehouse was the gentlest of chaperones. Old Miss Wodehouse people called her, not knowing why⁠—perhaps because that adjective was sweeter than the harsh one of middle age which belonged to her; and then there was such a difference between her and Lucy. Lucy was twenty, and in her sweetest bloom. Many people thought with Mr. Wentworth that there were not other two such eyes in Carlingford. Not that they were brilliant or penetrating, but as blue as heaven, and as serene and pure. So many persons thought, and the Perpetual Curate among them. The grey cloak fell in pretty folds around that light elastic figure; and there was not an old woman in the town so tender, so helpful, so handy as Lucy where trouble was, as all the poor people knew. So the three went down Prickett’s Lane, which leads from George Street towards the canal⁠—not a pleasant part of the town by any means; and if Mr. Wentworth was conscious of a certain haze of sunshine all round and about him, gliding over the poor pavement, and here and there transfiguring some baby bystander gazing open-mouthed at the pretty lady, could any reasonable man be surprised?</p>
			<p>“I hope your aunts were quite well, Mr. Wentworth, when you heard from them last,” said Miss Wodehouse, “and all your people at home. In such a small family as ours, we should go out of our wits if we did not hear every day; but I suppose it is different where there are so many. Lucy, when she goes from home,” said the tender elder sister, glancing at her with a half-maternal admiration⁠—“and she might always be visiting about if she liked⁠—writes to me every day.”</p>
			<p>“I have nobody who cares for me enough to write every week,” said the Curate, with a look which was for Lucy’s benefit. “I am not so lucky as you. My aunts are quite well, Miss Wodehouse, and they think I had better go up to town in May for the meetings,” added Mr. Wentworth, with a passing laugh; “and the rest of my people are very indignant that I am not of their way of thinking. There is Tom Burrows on the other side of the street; he is trying to catch <i>your</i> eye,” said the Curate, turning round upon Lucy; for the young man had come to such a pass that he could not address her in an ordinary and proper way like other people, but, because he dared not yet call her by her Christian name as if she belonged to him, had a strange rude way of indicating when he was speaking to her, by emphasis and action. It was singularly different from his usual good-breeding; but Lucy somehow rather liked it than otherwise. “He is not going to church for the sake of the service. He is going to please <i>you</i>. He has never forgotten what you did for that little boy of his; and, indeed, if you continue to go on so,” said Mr. Wentworth, lowering his voice, and more than ever bending his tall head to one side, “I shall have to put a stop to it somehow, for I am not prepared, whatever people say, to go in at once for <i>public</i> worship of the saints.”</p>
			<p>“I am going in here to call,” said Lucy. She looked up very innocently in the Curate’s face. “I promised the poor sick woman in the back room to see her every day, and I could not get out any sooner. I daresay I shall be at the schoolroom before you begin. Good-bye just now,” said the young Sister of Mercy. She went off all at once on this provoking but unexceptionable errand, looking with calm eyes upon the dismay which overspread the expressive countenance of her spiritual guide. Mr. Wentworth stood looking after her for a moment, stunned by the unexpected movement. When he went on, truth compels us to own that a thrill of disgust had taken the place of that vague general sense of beatitude which threw beauty even upon Prickett’s Lane. The Curate gave but a sulky nod to the salutation of Tom Burrows, and walked on in a savage mood by the side of Miss Wodehouse, around whom no nimbus of ideal glory hovered.</p>
			<p>“I am always afraid of its being too much for her, Mr. Wentworth,” said the anxious elder sister; “it upsets me directly; but then I never was like Lucy⁠—I can’t tell where all you young people have learned it; we never used to be taught so in my day; and though I am twice as old as she is, I know I am not half so much good in the world,” said the kind soul, with a gentle sigh. “I should like to see you in a parish of your own, where you would have it all your own way. I hope Mr. Morgan won’t be meddling when he comes to have time for everything. I should almost think he would⁠—though it seems unkind to say it⁠—by his face.”</p>
			<p>“I am doing nothing more than my duty,” said the Perpetual Curate, in morose tones. “This district was given into my hands by the late Rector. Mr. Morgan’s face does not matter to me.”</p>
			<p>“But I should like to see you in a parish of your own,” said Miss Wodehouse, meaning to please him. “You know papa always says so. St. Roque’s is very nice, but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“If you wish me out of the way, Miss Wodehouse, I am sorry to say you are not likely to be gratified,” said the Curate, “for I have no more expectation of any preferment than you have. Such chances don’t come in everybody’s way.”</p>
			<p>“But I thought your aunts, Mr. Wentworth⁠—” said poor Miss Wodehouse, who unluckily did not always know when to stop.</p>
			<p>“My aunts don’t approve of my principles,” answered Mr. Wentworth, who had his own reasons for speaking with a little asperity. “They are more likely to have me denounced at Exeter Hall. I will join you immediately. I must speak to these men across the street;” and the Curate accordingly walked into a knot of loungers opposite, with a decision of manner which Lucy’s desertion had helped him to. Miss Wodehouse, thus left alone, went on with lingering and somewhat doubtful steps. She was not used to being in “the district” by herself. It disturbed her mild, middle-aged habits to be left straying about here alone among all these poor people, whom she looked at half wistfully, half alarmed, feeling for them in her kind heart, but not at all knowing how to get at them as the young people did. The unruly children and gossiping mothers at the poor doors discomposed her sadly, and she was not near so sure that her grey cloak defended her from all rudeness as she pretended to be when assenting to the enthusiasm of Mr. Wentworth and Lucy. She made tremulous haste to get out of this scene, which she was not adapted for, to the shelter of the schoolroom, where, at least, she would be safe. “We never were taught so in my day,” she said to herself, with an unexpressed wonder which was right; but when she had reached that haven of shelter, was seized with a little panic for Lucy, and went out again and watched for her at the corner of the street, feeling very uncomfortable. It was a great relief to see her young sister coming down alert and bright even before she was joined by Mr. Wentworth, who had carried his point with the men he had been talking to. To see them coming down together, smiling to all those people at the doors who disturbed the gentle mind of Miss Wodehouse with mingled sentiments of sympathy and repulsion, bestowing nods of greeting here and there, pausing even to say a word to a few favoured clients, was a wonderful sight to the timid maiden lady at the corner of the street. Twenty years ago some such companion might have been by Miss Wodehouse’s side, but never among the poor people in Prickett’s Lane. Even with Lucy before her she did not understand it. As the two came towards her, other thoughts united with these in her kind soul. “I wonder whether anything will ever come of it?” she said to herself, and with that wandered into anxious reflections what this difference could be between Mr. Wentworth and his aunts: which cogitations, indeed, occupied her till the service began, and perhaps disturbed her due appreciation of it; for if Lucy and Mr. Wentworth got attached, as seemed likely, and Mr. Wentworth did not get a living, what was to come of it? The thought made this tender-hearted spectator sigh: perhaps she had some experience of her own to enlighten her on such a point. At least it troubled, with sympathetic human cares, the gentle soul which had lost the confidence of youth.</p>
			<p>As for the two most immediately concerned, they thought nothing at all about aunts or livings. Whether it is the divine influence of youth, or whether the vague unacknowledged love which makes two people happy in each other’s presence carries with it a certain inspiration, this at least is certain, that there is an absolute warmth of devotion arrived at in such moments, which many a soul, no longer happy, would give all the world to reach. Such crowds and heaps of blessings fall to these young souls! They said their prayers with all their hearts, not aware of deriving anything of that profound sweet trust and happiness from each other, but expanding over all the rude but reverend worshippers around them, with an unlimited faith in their improvement, almost in their perfection. This was what the wondering looker-on, scarcely able to keep her anxieties out of her prayers, could not understand, having forgotten, though she did not think so, the exaltation of that time of youth, as people do. She thought it all their goodness that they were able to put away their own thoughts; she did not know it was in the very nature of those unexpressed emotions to add the confidence of happiness to their prayers.</p>
			<p>And after a while they all separated and went away back into the world and the everyday hours. Young Wentworth and Lucy had not said a syllable to each other, except about the people in “the district,” and the Provident Society; and how that sober and laudable conversation could be called love-making, it would be difficult for the most ardent imagination to conceive. He was to dine with them that evening; so it was for but a very brief time that they parted when the Perpetual Curate left the ladies at the green door, and went away to his room, to attend to some other duties, before he arrayed himself for the evening. As for the sisters, they went in quite comfortably, and had their cup of tea before they dressed for dinner. Lucy was manager indoors as well as out. She was good for a great deal more than Miss Wodehouse in every practical matter. It was she who was responsible for the dinner, and had all the cares of the house upon her head. Notwithstanding, the elder sister took up her prerogative as they sat together in two very cosy easy-chairs, in a little room which communicated with both their bed-chambers up-stairs⁠—a very cosy little odd room, not a dressing-room nor a boudoir, but something between the two, where the sisters had their private talks upon occasion, and which was consecrated by many a libation of fragrant tea.</p>
			<p>“Lucy, my dear,” said Miss Wodehouse, whose gentle forehead was puckered with care, “I want to speak to you. I have not been able to get you out of my mind since ever we met Mr. Wentworth at the green door.”</p>
			<p>“Was there any need for getting me out of your mind?” said smiling Lucy. “I was a safe enough inmate, surely. I wonder how often I am out of your mind, Mary dear, night or day.”</p>
			<p>“That is true enough,” said Miss Wodehouse, “but you know that is not what I meant either. Lucy, are you quite sure you’re going on just as you ought⁠—”</p>
			<p>Here she made a troubled pause, and looked in the laughing face opposite, intent upon her with its startled eyes. “What have I done?” cried the younger sister. Miss Wodehouse shook her head with a great deal of seriousness.</p>
			<p>“It always begins with laughing,” said the experienced woman; “but if it ends without tears it will be something new to me. It’s about Mr. Wentworth, Lucy. You’re always together, day after day; and, my dear, such things can’t go on without coming to something⁠—what is to come of it? I have looked at it from every point of view, and I am sure I don’t know.”</p>
			<p>Lucy flushed intensely red, of course, at the Curate’s name; perhaps she had not expected it just at that moment; but she kept her composure like a sensible girl as she was.</p>
			<p>“I thought it was the other side that were questioned about their intentions,” she said. “Am I doing anything amiss? Mr. Wentworth is the Curate of St. Roque’s, and I am one of the district-visitors, and we can’t help seeing a great deal of each other so long as this work goes on at Wharfside. You wouldn’t like to stop a great work because we are obliged to see a good deal of⁠—of one particular person?” said Lucy, with youthful virtue, looking at her sister’s face; at which tone and look Miss Wodehouse immediately faltered, as the culprit knew she must.</p>
			<p>“No⁠—oh no, no⁠—to be sure not,” said the disturbed monitor. “When you say that, I don’t know how to answer you. It must be right, I suppose. I am quite sure it is wonderful to see such young creatures as you, and how you can tell the right way to set about it. But things did not use to be so in my young days. Girls dare not have done such things twenty years ago⁠—not in Carlingford, Lucy,” said Miss Wodehouse; “and, dear, I think you ought to be a little careful, for poor Mr. Wentworth’s sake.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think Mr. Wentworth is in any particular danger,” said Lucy, putting down her cup, with a slight curve at the corners of her pretty mouth⁠—“and it is quite time for you to begin dressing. You know you don’t like to be hurried, dear;” with which speech the young housekeeper got up from her easy-chair, gave her sister a kiss as she passed, and went away, singing softly, to her toilette. Perhaps there was a little flutter in Lucy’s heart as she bound it round with her favourite blue ribbons. Perhaps it was this that gave a certain startled gleam to her blue eyes, and made even her father remark them when she went down-stairs⁠—“It seems to me as if this child were growing rather pretty, Molly, eh? I don’t know what other people think,” said Mr. Wodehouse⁠—and perhaps Mr. Wentworth, who was just being ushered into the drawing-room at the moment, heard the speech, for he, too, looked as if he had never found it out before. Luckily there was a party, and no opportunity for sentiment. The party was in honour of the Rector and his wife; and Mr. Wentworth could not but be conscious before the evening was over that he had done something to lose the favour of his clerical brother. There was a good deal of Church talk, as was natural, at the churchwarden’s table, where three clergymen were dining⁠—for Mr. Morgan’s curate was there as well; and the Curate of St. Roque’s, who was slightly hot-tempered, could not help feeling himself disapproved of. It was not, on the whole, a satisfactory evening. Mr. Morgan talked rather big, when the ladies went away, of his plans for the reformation of Carlingford. He went into statistics about the poor, and the number of people who attended no church, without taking any notice of that “great work” which Mr. Wentworth knew to be going on at Wharfside. The Rector even talked of Wharfside, and of the necessity of exertion on behalf of that wretched district, with a studious unconsciousness of Mr. Wentworth; and all but declined to receive better information when Mr. Wodehouse proffered it. Matters were scarcely better in the drawing-room, where Lucy was entertaining everybody, and had no leisure for the Perpetual Curate. He took his hat with a gloomy sentiment of satisfaction when it was time to go away; but when the green door was closed behind him, Mr. Wentworth, with his first step into the dewy darkness, plunged headlong into a sea of thought. He had to walk down the whole length of Grange Lane to his lodging, which was in the last house of the row, a small house in a small garden, where Mrs. Hadwin, the widow of a whilom curate, was permitted by public opinion, on the score of her own unexceptionable propriety,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> to receive a lodger without loss of position thereby. It was moonlight, or rather it ought to have been moonlight, and no lamps were lighted in Grange Lane, according to the economical regulations of Carlingford; and as Mr. Wentworth pursued his way down the dark line of garden-walls, in the face of a sudden April shower which happened to be falling, he had full scope and opportunity for his thoughts.</p>
			<p>These thoughts were not the most agreeable in the world. In the first place it must be remembered that for nearly a year past Mr. Wentworth had had things his own way in Carlingford. He had been more than rector, he had been archdeacon, or rather bishop, in Mr. Proctor’s time; for that good man was humble, and thankful for the advice and assistance of his young brother, who knew so much better than he did. Now, to be looked upon as an unauthorised workman, a kind of meddling, Dissenterish, missionising individual, was rather hard upon the young man. And then he thought of his aunts. The connection, imperceptible to an ignorant observer, which existed between the Miss Wentworths and Mr. Morgan, and Lucy, and many other matters interesting to their nephew, was a sufficiently real connection when you came to know it. That parish of his own which Miss Wodehouse had wished him⁠—which would free the young clergyman from all trammels so far as his work was concerned; and would enable him to marry, and do everything for him⁠—it was in the power of the Miss Wentworths to bestow; but they were Evangelical women, very public-spirited, and thinking nothing of their nephew in comparison with their duty; and he was at that time of life, and of that disposition, which, for fear of being supposed to wish to deceive them, would rather exaggerate and make a display of the difference of his own views. Not for freedom, not for Lucy, would the Perpetual Curate temporise and manage the matter; so the fact was that he stood at the present moment in a very perilous predicament. But for this family living, which was, with their mother’s property, in the hands of her co-heiresses, the three Miss Wentworths, young Frank Wentworth had not a chance of preferment in the world; for the respectable Squire his father had indulged in three wives and three families, and such a regiment of sons that all his influence had been fully taxed to provide for them. Gerald, the clergyman of the first lot, held the family living⁠—not a very large one⁠—which belonged to the Wentworths; and Frank, who was of the second, had been educated expressly with an eye to Skelmersdale, which belonged to his aunts. How he came at the end to differ so completely from these excellent ladies in his religious views is not our business just at present; but in the mean time matters were in a very critical position. The old incumbent of Skelmersdale was eighty, and had been ill all winter; and if the Miss Wentworths were not satisfied somehow, it was all over with their nephew’s hopes.</p>
			<p>Such were the thoughts that occupied his mind as he walked down Grange Lane in the dark, past the tedious, unsympathetic line of garden-walls, with the rain in his face. The evening’s entertainment had stirred up a great many dormant sentiments. His influence in Carlingford had been ignored by this new-comer, who evidently thought he could do what he liked without paying any attention to the Curate of St. Roque’s; and, what was a great deal worse, he had found Lucy unapproachable, and had realised, if not for the first time, still with more distinctness than ever before, that she did not belong to him, and that he had no more right than any other acquaintance to monopolise her society. This last discovery was bitter to the young man⁠—it was this that made him set his face to the rain, and his teeth, as if that could do any good. He had been happy in her mere society to-day, without entering into any of the terrible preliminaries of a closer connection. But now that was over. She did not belong to him, and he could not bear the thought. And how was she ever to belong to him? Not, certainly, if he was to be a Perpetual Curate of St. Roque’s, or anywhere else. He felt, in the misery of the moment, as if he could never go to that green door again, or walk by her sweet side to that service in which they had joined so lately. He wondered whether she cared, with a despairing pang of anxiety, through which for an instant a celestial gleam of consciousness leaped, making the darkness all the greater afterwards. And to think that three old ladies, of whom it was not in the nature of things that the young man could be profoundly reverent, should hold in their hands the absolute power of his life, and could determine whether it was to be sweet with hope and love, or stern, constrained, and impoverished, without Lucy or any other immediate light! What a strange anomaly this was which met him full in the face as he pursued his thoughts! If it had been his bishop, or his college, or any fitting tribunal⁠—but his aunts! Mr. Wentworth’s ring at his own door was so much more hasty than usual that Mrs. Hadwin paused in the hall, when she had lighted her candle, to see if anything was the matter. The little neat old lady held up her candle to look at him as he came in, glistening all over with rain-drops.</p>
			<p>“I hope you are not wet, Mr. Wentworth,” she said. “It is only an April shower, and we want it so much in the gardens. And I hope you have had a nice party and a pleasant evening.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you⁠—pretty well,” said the Perpetual Curate, with less suavity than usual, and a sigh that nearly blew Mrs. Hadwin’s candle out. She saw he was discomposed, and therefore, with a feminine instinct, found more to say than usual before she made her peaceful way to bed. She waited while Mr. Wentworth lighted his candle too.</p>
			<p>“Mr. Wodehouse’s parties are always pleasant,” she said. “I never go out, you know; but I like to hear of people enjoying themselves. I insist upon you going up-stairs before me, Mr. Wentworth. I have so little breath to spare, and I take such a long time going up, that you would be tired to death waiting for me. Now, don’t be polite. I insist upon you going up first. Thank you. Now I can take my time.”</p>
			<p>And she took her time accordingly, keeping Mr. Wentworth waiting on the landing to say good-night to her, much to his silent exasperation. When he got into the shelter of his own sitting-room, he threw himself upon a sofa, and continued his thoughts with many a troubled addition. A young man, feeling in a great measure the world before him, conscious of considerable powers, standing on the very threshold of so much possible good and happiness⁠—it was hideous to look up, in his excited imagination, and see the figures of these three old ladies, worse than Fates, standing across the prospect and barring the way.</p>
			<p>And Lucy, meantime, was undoing her blue ribbons with a thrill of sweet agitation in her untroubled bosom. Perhaps Mary was right, and it was about coming to the time when this half-feared, half-hoped revelation could not be postponed much longer. For it will be perceived that Lucy was not in much doubt of young Wentworth’s sentiments. And then she paused in the dark, after she had said her prayers, to give one timid thought to the sweet life that seemed to lie before her so close at hand⁠—in which, perhaps, he and she were to go out together, she did not know where, for the help of the world and the comfort of the sorrowful; and not trusting herself to look much at that ideal, said another prayer, and went to sleep like one of God’s beloved, with a tear too exquisite to be shed brimming under her long eyelashes. At this crisis of existence, perhaps for once in her life, the woman has the best of it; for very different from Lucy’s were the thoughts with which the Curate sought his restless pillow, hearing the rain drip all the night, and trickle into Mrs. Hadwin’s reservoirs. The old lady had a passion for rain-water, and it was a gusty night.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
