<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-29" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h2>
			<p>Mr. Wentworth went upon his way, after he had parted from Mrs. Morgan, with a moment’s gratitude; but he had not gone half-a-dozen steps before that amiable sentiment yielded to a sense of soreness and vexation. He had almost acknowledged that he was conscious of the slander against which he had made up his mind to present a blank front of unconsciousness and passive resistance, and he was angry with himself for his susceptibility to this unexpected voice of kindness. He was going home, but he did not care for going home. Poor Mrs. Hadwin’s anxious looks of suspicion had added to the distaste with which he thought of encountering again the sullen shabby rascal to whom he had given shelter. It was Saturday night, and he had still his sermon to prepare for the next day; but the young man was in a state of disgust with all the circumstances of his lot, and could not make up his mind to go in and address himself to his work as he ought to have done. Such a sense of injustice and cruelty as possessed him was not likely to promote composition, especially as the pulpit addresses of the Curate of St. Roque’s were not of a declamatory kind. To think that so many years’ work could be neutralised in a day by a sudden breath of scandal, made him not humble or patient, but fierce and resentful. He had been in Wharfside that afternoon, and felt convinced that even the dying woman at No. 10 Prickett’s Lane had heard of Rosa Elsworthy; and he saw, or imagined he saw, many a distrustful inquiring glance thrown at him by people to whom he had been a kind of secondary Providence. Naturally the mere thought of the failing allegiance of the “district” went to Mr. Wentworth’s heart. When he turned round suddenly from listening to a long account of one poor family’s distresses, and saw Tom Burrows, the gigantic bargeman, whose six children the Curate had baptised in a lump, and whose baby had been held at the font by Lucy Wodehouse herself, looking at him wistfully with rude affection, and something that looked very much like pity, it is impossible to describe the bitterness that welled up in the mind of the Perpetual Curate. Instead of leaving Wharfside comforted as he usually did, he came away wounded and angry, feeling to its full extent the fickleness of popular sympathy. And when he came into Grange Lane and saw the shutters closed, and Mr. Wodehouse’s green door shut fast, as if never more to open, all sources of consolation seemed to be shut against him. Even the habit he had of going into Elsworthy’s to get his newspaper, and to hear what talk might be current in Carlingford, contributed to the sense of utter discomfort and wretchedness which overwhelmed him. Men in other positions have generally to consult the opinion of their equals only; but all sorts of small people can plant thorns in the path of a priest who has given himself with fervour to the duties of his office. True enough, such clouds blow by, and sometimes leave behind a sky clearer than before; but that result is doubtful, and Mr. Wentworth was not of the temper to comfort himself with philosophy. He felt ingratitude keenly, as men do at eight-and-twenty, even when they have made up their minds that gratitude is a delusion; and still more keenly, with deep resentment and indignation, he felt the horrible doubt which had diffused itself around him, and seemed to be looking at him out of everybody’s eyes. In such a state of mind one bethinks one’s self of one’s relations⁠—those friends not always congenial, but whom one looks to instinctively, when one is young, in the crisis of life. He knocked at his aunts’ door almost without knowing it, as he went down Grange Lane, after leaving Mrs. Morgan, with vague sentences of his sermon floating in his mind through all the imbroglio of other thoughts. Even aunt Dora’s foolish affection might have been a little comfort at the moment, and he could not but be a little curious to know whether they had heard Elsworthy’s story, and what the patronesses of Skelmersdale thought of the matter. Somehow, just then, in the midst of his distresses, a vision of Skelmersdale burst upon the Perpetual Curate like a glimpse of a better world. If he could but escape there out of all this sickening misconception and ingratitude⁠—if he could but take Lucy into his protecting arms, and carry her away far from the clouds that were gathering over her path as well as his own. The thought found vent in an impatient long-drawn sigh, and was then expelled contemptuously from the young man’s bosom. If a hundred Skelmersdales were in his power, here, where his honour had been attacked, it was necessary to remain, in the face of all obstacles, till it was cleared.</p>
			<p>The Miss Wentworths had just come up to the drawing-room after dinner when their nephew entered. As for Miss Dora, she had seated herself by the window, which was open, and, with her light little curls fluttering upon her cheek, was watching a tiny puff of smoke by the side of the great laurel, which indicated the spot occupied at this moment by Jack and his cigar. “Dear fellow, he does enjoy the quiet,” she said, with a suppressed little sniff of emotion. “To think we should be in such a misery about poor dear Frank, and have Jack, about whom we have all been so unbelieving, sent to us for a consolation. My poor brother will be so happy,” said Miss Dora, almost crying at the thought. She was under the influence of this sentiment when the Curate entered. It was perhaps impossible for Mr. Wentworth to present himself before his three aunts at the present crisis without a certain consciousness in his looks; and it was well that it was twilight, and he could not read distinctly all that was written in their countenances. Miss Cecilia held out her lovely old hand to him first of all. She said, “How do you do, Frank?” which was not very original, but yet counted for a good deal in the silence. When he came up to her, she offered him her sweet old cheek with a look of pity which touched, and yet affronted, the Perpetual Curate. He thought it was the wisest way to accept the challenge at once.</p>
			<p>“It is very good of you, but you need not be sorry for me,” he said, as he sat down by her. And then there was a little pause⁠—an awful pause; for Miss Wentworth had no further observations to offer, and Miss Dora, who had risen up hastily, dropped into her chair again in a disconsolate condition, when she saw that her nephew did not take any notice of her. The poor little woman sat down with miserable sensations, and did not find the comfort she hoped for in contemplation of the smoke of Jack’s cigar. After all, it was Frank who was the original owner of Miss Dora’s affections. When she saw him, as she thought, in a state of guilt and trouble, received with grim silence by the dreaded Leonora, the poor lady began to waver greatly, divided between a longing to return to her old allegiance, and a certain pride in the new bonds which bound her to so great a sinner as Jack. She could not help feeling the distinction of having such a reprobate in her hands. But the sight of Frank brought back old habits, and Miss Dora felt at her wits’ end, and could not tell what to do.</p>
			<p>At length Miss Leonora’s voice, which was decided contralto, broke the silence. “I am very glad to see you, Frank,” said the strong-minded aunt. “From something we heard, I supposed you had gone away for a time, and we were rather anxious about your movements. There are so many things going on in the family just now, that one does not know what to think. I am glad to see you are still in Carlingford.”</p>
			<p>“I never had the least intention of going away,” said Mr. Wentworth. “I can’t imagine who could tell you so.”</p>
			<p>“Nobody told us,” said Miss Leonora; “we drew that conclusion from other things we heard. Dora, give Frank the newspaper with that paragraph about Gerald. I have prophesied from the very first which way Gerald was tending. It is very shocking of him, and I don’t know what they are to do, for Louisa is an expensive little fool; and if he leaves the Rectory, they can’t have enough to live on. If you knew what your brother was going to do, why didn’t you advise him otherwise? Besides, he will be wretched,” said the discriminating woman. “I never approved of his ways, but I could not say anything against his sincerity. I believe his heart was in his work; a man may be very zealous, and yet very erroneous,” said Miss Leonora, like an oracle, out of the shadows.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know if he is erroneous or not⁠—but I know I should like to punch this man’s head,” said the Curate, who had taken the paper to the window, where there was just light enough to make out the paragraph. He stood looming over Miss Dora, a great black shadow against the fading light. “All the mischief in the world comes of these villanous papers,” said Mr. Wentworth. “Though I did not think anybody nowadays believed in the ‘Chronicle.’ Gerald has not gone over to Rome, and I don’t think he means to go. I daresay you have agitated yourselves unnecessarily about more than one supposed event in the family,” he continued, throwing the paper on the table. “I don’t know anything very alarming that has happened as yet, except, perhaps, the prodigal’s return,” said the Perpetual Curate, with a slight touch of bitterness. His eye had just lighted on Jack sauntering through the garden with his cigar; and Mr. Wentworth was human, and could not entirely refrain from the expression of his sentiments.</p>
			<p>“But oh, Frank, my dear, you are not angry about poor Jack?” said Miss Dora. “He has not known what it was to be at home for years and years. A stepmother is so different from an own mother, and he never has had any opportunities; and oh, Frank, don’t you remember that there is joy in heaven?” cried the anxious aunt⁠—“not to say that he is the eldest son. And it is such a thing for the family to see him changing his ways in such a beautiful spirit!” said Miss Dora. The room was almost dark by this time, and she did not see that her penitent had entered while she spoke.</p>
			<p>“It is very consoling to gain your approval, aunt Dora,” said Jack. “My brother Frank doesn’t know me. If the Squire <i>will</i> make a nursery of his house, what can a man do? But a fellow can’t be quite ruined as long as he has⁠—” aunts, the reprobate was about to say, with an inflection of laughter intended for Frank’s ear only in his voice; but he fortunately remembered in time that Miss Leonora had an acute intelligence, and was not to be trifled with⁠—“As long as he has female relations,” said Jack, in his most feeling tone. “Men never sympathise with men.” He seemed to be apologising for Frank’s indifference, as well as for his own sins. He had just had a very good dinner⁠—for the Miss Wentworths’ cook was the best in Carlingford⁠—and Jack, whose digestion was perfect, was disposed to please everybody, and had, in particular, no disposition to quarrel with Frank.</p>
			<p>“Oh, my dear, you see how humble and forgiving he is,” said Miss Dora, rising on tiptoe to whisper into the Curate’s ear; “and always takes your part whenever you are mentioned,” said the injudicious aunt. Meantime the other sisters were very silent, sitting each in the midst of her own group of shadows. Then Miss Leonora rose with a sudden rustling of all her draperies, and with her own energetic hand rang the bell.</p>
			<p>“Now the lamp is coming,” said Jack, in a tone of despair, “a bright, blank, pitiless globe like the world; and instead of this delicious darkness, where one can see nothing distinctly, my heart will be torn asunder for the rest of the evening by the sight of suicide. Why do we ever have lights?” said the exquisite, laying himself down softly on a sofa. When the lamp was brought in, Jack became visible stretched out in an attitude of perfect repose and tranquillity, with a quiet conscience written in every fold of his scrupulous apparel. As for Frank, on the contrary, he was still in morning dress, and was biting his nails, and had a cloud upon his brow which the sudden light disclosed like a traitor before he was prepared for it. Between the two brothers such a contrast was visible that it was not surprising if Miss Dora, still wavering in her allegiance, went back with relief to the calm countenance of her penitent, and owned to herself with trembling that the Curate looked preoccupied and guilty. Perhaps Miss Leonora came to a similar conclusion. She seated herself at her writing-table with her usual air of business, and made a pen to a hard point by the light of the candles, which were sacred to her particular use.</p>
			<p>“I heard some news this morning which pleased me very much,” said Miss Leonora. “I daresay you remember Julia Trench? You two used to be a great deal together at one time. She is going to be married to Mr. Shirley’s excellent curate, who is a young man of the highest character. He did very well at the university, I believe,” said the patroness of Skelmersdale; “but I confess I don’t care much for academical honours. He is an excellent clergyman, which is a great deal more to the purpose, and I thoroughly agree with his views. So, knowing the interest we take in Julia, you may think how pleased we were,” said Miss Leonora, looking full into her nephew’s face. He knew what she meant as distinctly as if she had put it in words.</p>
			<p>“When is old Shirley going to die?” said Jack from the sofa. “It’s rather hard upon Frank, keeping him out of the living so long; and if I were you, I’d be jealous of this model curate,” said the fine gentleman, with a slight civil yawn. “I don’t approve of model curates upon family livings. People are apt to make comparisons,” said Jack, and then he raised his head with a little energy⁠—“Ah, there it is,” said the Sybarite, “the first moth. Don’t be precipitate, my dear fellow. Aunt Dora, pray sit quietly where you are, and don’t disturb our operations. It is only a moth, to be sure; but don’t let us cut short the moments of a creature that has no hereafter,” said Jack, solemnly. He disturbed them all by this eccentric manifestation of benevolence, and flapped his handkerchief round Miss Dora, upon whose white cap the unlucky moth, frightened by its benefactor’s vehemence, was fluttering wildly. Jack even forgot himself so far as to swear softly in French at the frightened insect as it flew wildly off at a tangent, not to the open window, but to Miss Leonora’s candles, where it came to an immediate end. Miss Leonora sat rather grimly looking on at all this byplay. When her elegant nephew threw himself back once more upon his sofa, she glanced from him to his brother with a comparison which perhaps was not so much to the disadvantage of the Perpetual Curate. But even Miss Leonora, though so sensible, had her weaknesses; and she was very evangelical, and could put up with a great deal from the sinner who had placed himself for conversion in her hands.</p>
			<p>“We have too great a sense of our responsibility to treat Skelmersdale simply as a family living,” she said. “Besides, Frank of course is to have Wentworth Rectory. Gerald’s perversion is a great blow; but still, if it <i>is</i> to be, Frank will be provided for at least. As for our parish⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon,” said the Curate; “I have not the least intention of leaving Carlingford. At the present moment neither Skelmersdale nor Wentworth would tempt me. I am in no doubt as to where my work lies, and there is enough of it to satisfy any man.” He could not help thinking, as he spoke, of ungrateful Wharfside, for which he had done so much, and the recollection brought a little flush of indignant colour to his cheek.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Frank, my dear,” said Miss Dora in a whisper, stealing up to him, “if it is not true, you must not mind. Oh, my dear boy, nobody will mind it if it is not true.” She put her hand timidly upon his arm as she reached up to his ear, and at the same time the poor little woman, who was trying all she could to serve two masters, kept one eye upon Jack, lest her momentary return to his brother might have a disastrous effect upon the moral reformation which she was nursing with so much care. As for the Curate, he gave her a hasty glance, which very nearly made an end of Miss Dora. She retired to her seat with no more courage to say anything, unable to make out whether it was virtuous reproach or angry guilt which looked at her so sternly. She felt her headache coming on as she sank again upon her chair. If she could but have stolen away to her own room, and had a good comforting cry in the dark, it might have kept off the headache; but then she had to be faithful to her post, and to look after the reformation of Jack.</p>
			<p>“I have no doubt that a great work might be done in Carlingford,” said Miss Leonora, “if you would take my advice and organise matters properly, and make due provision for the lay element. As for Sisters of Mercy, I never had any belief in them. They only get young clergymen into mischief,” said the strong-minded aunt. “We are going to have tea, Frank, if you will have some. Poor Mr. Shirley has got matters into very bad order at Skelmersdale, but things will be different under the new incumbent, I hope,” said Miss Leonora, shooting a side-glance of keen inspection at the Curate, who bore it steadily.</p>
			<p>“I hope he will conduct himself to your satisfaction,” said Mr. Wentworth, with a bland but somewhat grim aspect, from the window; “but I can’t wait for tea. I have still got some of my work to do for to-morrow; so good-night.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll walk with you, Frank,” said his elder brother. “My dear aunts, don’t look alarmed; nothing can happen to me. There are few temptations in Grange Lane; and, besides, I shall come back directly. <i>I</i> cannot do without my tea,” said Jack, by way of consoling poor Miss Dora, who had started with consternation at the proposal. And the two brothers went out into the fresh evening air together, their aunt Dora watching them from the window with inexpressible anxiety; for perhaps it was not quite right for a clergyman to saunter out of doors in the evening with such a doubtful member of society as Jack; and perhaps Frank, having himself fallen into evil ways, might hinder or throw obstacles in the way of his brother’s re-establishment in the practice of all the virtues. Miss Dora, who had to carry them both upon her shoulders, and who got no sympathy in the present case from her hard-hearted sisters, was fain at last to throw a shawl over her head and steal out to that summer-house which was built into the garden-wall, and commanded Grange Lane from its little window. There she established herself in the darkness, an affectionate spy. There ought to have been a moon that night, and accordingly the lamps were not lighted at that end of Grange Lane, for the authorities in Carlingford bore a frugal mind. But the sky had become cloudy, and the moon shone only at intervals, which gave a certain character of mystery and secrecy to the night. Through this uncertain light the anxious woman saw her two nephews coming and going under the window, apparently in the most eager conversation. Miss Dora’s anxiety grew to such a height that she opened softly a chink of the window in hopes of being able to hear as well as to see, but that attempt was altogether unsuccessful. Then, when they had walked about for half an hour, which looked like two hours to Miss Dora, who was rapidly taking one of her bad colds at the half-open window, they were joined by another figure which she did not think she had ever seen before. The excitement was growing tremendous, and the aspect of the three conspirators more and more alarming, when the poor lady started with a little scream at a noise behind her, and turning round, saw her maid, severe as a pursuing Fate, standing at the door. “After giving me your word as you wouldn’t come no more?” said the reproachful despot who swayed Miss Dora’s soul. After that she had to make the best of her way indoors, thankful not to be carried to her room and put into hot water, which was the original intention of Collins. But it would be impossible to describe the emotions of Miss Dora’s mind after this glimpse into the heart of the volcano on which her innocent feet were standing. Unless it were murder or high treason, what could they have to plot about? or was the mysterious stranger a disguised Jesuit, and the whole business some terrible Papist conspiracy? Jack, who had been so much abroad, and Gerald, who was going over to Rome, and Frank, who was in trouble of every description, got entangled together in Miss Dora’s disturbed imagination. No reality could be so frightful as the fancies with which she distracted herself after that peep from the summer-house; and it would be impossible to describe the indignation of Collins, who knew that her mistress would kill herself some day, and was aware that she, in her own person, would get little rest that night.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
