<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h2>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s day had been closely occupied up to this point. He had gone through a great many emotions, and transacted a good deal of business, and he went home with the comparative ease of a man whose anxieties are relieved, not by any real deliverance, but by the soothing influence of fatigue and the sense of something accomplished. He was not in reality in a better position than when he left his house in the morning, bitterly mortified, injured, and wounded at the tenderest point. Things were very much the same as they had been, but a change had come over the feelings of the Perpetual Curate. He remembered with a smile, as he went down Grange Lane, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor was to dine with him, and that he had rashly undertaken to have something better than a chop. It was a very foolish engagement under the circumstances. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was cogitating within himself whether he could make an appeal to the sympathies of his aunt’s cook for something worthy of the sensitive palate of a Fellow of All-Souls, when all such thoughts were suddenly driven out of his mind by the apparition of his brother Gerald⁠—perhaps the last man in the world whom he could have expected to see in Carlingford. Gerald was coming up Grange Lane in his meditative way from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s door. To look at him was enough to reveal to any clear-sighted spectator the presence of some perpetual argument in his mind. Though he had come out to look for Frank, his eyes were continually forsaking his intention, catching spots of lichen on the wall and clumps of herbage on the roadside. The long discussion had become so familiar to him, that even now, when his mind was made up, he could not relinquish the habit which possessed him. When he perceived Frank, he quickened his steps. They met with only such a modified expression of surprise on the part of the younger brother as was natural to a meeting of English kinsfolk. “I heard Louisa’s voice in my aunt’s drawing-room,” said Frank; “but, oddly enough, it never occurred to me that you might have come with her;” and then Gerald turned with the Curate. When the ordinary family questions were asked and answered, a silence ensued between the two. As for Frank, in the multiplicity of his own cares, he had all but forgotten his brother; and Gerald’s mind, though full of anxiety, had something of the calm which might be supposed to subdue the senses of a dying man. He was on the eve of a change, which appeared to him almost as great as death; and the knowledge of that gave him a curious stillness of composure⁠—almost a reluctance to speak. Strangely enough, each brother at this critical moment felt it necessary to occupy himself with the affairs of the other, and to postpone the consideration of his own.</p>
			<p>“I hope you have changed your mind a little since we last met,” said Frank; “your last letter⁠—”</p>
			<p>“We’ll talk of that presently,” said the elder brother; “in the mean time I want to know about <em>you</em>. What is all this? My father is in a great state of anxiety. He does not seem to have got rid of his fancy that you were somehow involved with Jack⁠—and Jack is here,” said Gerald, with a look which betokened some anxiety on his own part. “I wish you would give me your confidence. Right or wrong, I have come to stand by you, Frank,” said the Rector of Wentworth, rather mournfully. He had been waiting at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s for the last two hours. He had seen that worthy woman’s discomposed looks, and felt that she did not shake her head for nothing. Jack had been the bugbear of the family for a long time past. Gerald was conscious of adding heavily at the present moment to the Squire’s troubles. Charley was at Malta, in indifferent health; all the others were boys. There was only Frank to give the father a little consolation; and now Frank, it appeared, was most deeply compromised of all; no wonder Gerald was sad. And then he drew forth the anonymous letter which had startled all the Wentworths on the previous night. “This is written by somebody who hates you,” said the elder brother; “but I suppose there must be some meaning in it. I wish you would be frank with me, and tell me what it is.”</p>
			<p>This appeal had brought them to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s door, which the Curate opened with his key before he answered his brother. The old lady herself was walking in the garden in a state of great agitation, with a shawl thrown over the best cap, which she had put on in honour of the stranger. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s feelings were too much for her at that moment. Her head was nodding with the excitement of age, and injured virtue trembled in every line of her face. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, I cannot put up with it any longer; it is a thing I never was used to,” she cried, as soon as the Curate came within hearing. “I have shut my eyes to a great deal, but I cannot bear it any longer. If I had been a common lodging-house keeper, I could not have been treated with less respect; but to be outraged⁠—to be insulted⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What is the matter, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, in dismay.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” said the old lady, who was trembling with passion, “you may think it no matter to turn a house upside down as mine has been since Easter; to bring all sorts of disreputable people about⁠—persons whom a gentlewoman in my position ought never to have heard of. I received your brother into my house,” cried <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin, turning to Gerald, “because he was a clergyman and I knew his family, and hoped to find him one whose principles I could approve of. I have put up with a great deal, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, more than I could tell to anybody. I took in his friend when he asked me, and gave him the spare room, though it was against my judgment. I suffered a man with a beard to be seen stealing in and out of my house in the evening, as if he was afraid to be seen. You gentlemen may not think much of that, but it was a terrible thing for a lady in my position, unprotected, and not so well off as I once was. It made my house like a lodging-house, and so my friends told me; but I was so infatuated I put up with it all for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frank’s sake. But there <em>is</em> a limit,” said the aggrieved woman. “I would not have believed it⁠—I <em>could</em> not have believed it of you⁠—not whatever people might say: to think of that abandoned disgraceful girl coming openly to my door⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Good heavens!” cried the Curate: he seized <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s hand, evidently forgetting everything else she had said. “What girl?⁠—whom do you mean? For heaven’s sake compose yourself and answer me. Who was it? Rosa Elsworthy? This is a matter of life and death for me,” cried the young man. “Speak quickly: when was it?⁠—where is she? For heaven’s sake, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin, speak⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Let me go, sir!” cried the indignant old lady; “let me go this instant⁠—this is insult upon insult. I appeal to you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gerald⁠—to think I should ever be supposed capable of encouraging such a horrid shameless⁠—! How dare you⁠—how dare you name such a creature to me?” exclaimed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin, with hysterical sobs. “If it were not for your family, you should never enter my house again. Oh, thank you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gerald Wentworth⁠—indeed I am not able to walk. I am sure I don’t want to grieve you about your brother⁠—I tried not to believe it⁠—I tried as long as I could not to believe it⁠—but you hear how he speaks. Do you think, sir, I would for a moment permit such a creature to enter my door?” she cried again, turning to Frank Wentworth as she leaned upon his brother’s arm.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what kind of a creature the poor girl is,” said the Curate; “but I know that if you had taken her in, it would have saved me much pain and trouble. Tell me, at least, when she came, and who saw her⁠—or if she left any message? Perhaps Sarah will tell me,” he said, with a sigh of despair, as he saw that handmaiden hovering behind. Sarah had been a little shy of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth since the night Wodehouse disappeared. She had betrayed herself to the Curate, and did not like to remember the fact. Now she came up with a little toss of her head and a sense of equality, primed and ready with her reply.</p>
			<p>“I hope I think more of myself than to take notice of any sich,” said Sarah; but her instincts were more vivid than those of her mistress, and she could not refrain from particulars. “Them as saw her now, wouldn’t see much in her; I never see such a changed creature,” said Sarah; “not as I ever thought anything of her looks! a bit of a shawl dragged around her, and her eyes as if they would jump out of her head. Laws! she didn’t get no satisfaction here,” said the housemaid, with a little triumph.</p>
			<p>“Silence, Sarah!” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin; “that is not a way to speak to your clergyman. I’ll go in, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, please⁠—I am not equal to so much agitation. If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frank will come indoors, I should be glad to have an explanation⁠—for this sort of thing cannot go on,” said the old lady. As for the Curate he did not pay the least attention either to the disapproval or the impertinence.</p>
			<p>“At what time did she come?⁠—which way did she go?⁠—did she leave any message?” he repeated; “a moment’s common-sense will be of more use than all this indignation. It is of the greatest importance to me to see Rosa Elsworthy. Here’s how it is, Gerald,” said the Curate, driven to his wit’s end; “a word from the girl is all I want to make an end of all this⁠—this disgusting folly⁠—and you see how I am thwarted. Perhaps they will answer <em>you</em>. When did she come?⁠—did she say anything?” he cried, turning sharply upon Sarah, who, frightened by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s look, and dismayed to see her mistress moving away, and to feel herself alone opposed to him, burst at last into an alarmed statement.</p>
			<p>“Please, sir, it aint no fault of mine,” said Sarah; “it was Missis as saw her. She aint been gone not half an hour. It’s all happened since your brother left. She come to the side-door; Missis wouldn’t hear nothing she had got to say, nor let her speak. Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, don’t you go after her!” cried the girl, following him to the side-door, to which he rushed immediately. Not half an hour gone! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth burst into the lane which led up to Grove Street, and where there was not a soul to be seen. He went back to Grange Lane, and inspected every corner where she could have hid herself. Then, after a pause, he walked impetuously up the quiet road, and into Elsworthy’s shop. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Elsworthy was there alone, occupying her husband’s place, who had gone as usual to the railway for the evening papers. She jumped up from the high stool she was seated on when the Curate entered. “Good gracious, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth!” cried the frightened woman, and instinctively called the errand-boy, who was the only other individual within hearing. She was unprotected, and quite unable to defend herself if he meant anything; and it was impossible to doubt that there was meaning of the most serious and energetic kind in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s face.</p>
			<p>“Has Rosa come back?” he asked. “Is she here? Don’t stare at me, but speak. Has she come back? I have just heard that she was at my house half an hour ago: have you got her safe?”</p>
			<p>It was at this moment that Wodehouse came lounging in, with his cigar appearing in the midst of his beard, and a curious look of self-exhibition and demonstration in his general aspect. When the Curate, hearing the steps, turned round upon him, he fell back for a moment, not expecting such an encounter. Then the vagabond recovered himself, and came forward with the swagger which was his only alternative.</p>
			<p>“I thought you weren’t on good terms here,” said Wodehouse; “who are you asking after? It’s a fine evening, and they don’t seem up to much in my house. I have asked Jack Wentworth to the Blue Boar at seven⁠—will you come? I don’t want to bear any grudge. I don’t know if they can cook anything fit to be eaten in my house. It wasn’t me you were asking after?” The fellow came and stood close, shoulder to shoulder, by the Perpetual Curate. “By Jove, sir! I’ve as good a right here as you⁠—or anywhere,” he muttered, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth withdrew from him. He had to say it aloud to convince himself of the fact; for it was hard, after being clandestine for half a lifetime, to move about freely in the daylight. As for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, he fixed his eyes full on the new-comer’s face.</p>
			<p>“I want to know if Rosa has come home,” he repeated, in the clearest tones of his clear voice. “I am told she called at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s half an hour ago. Has she come back?”</p>
			<p>He scarcely noticed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Elsworthy’s answer, for, in the mean time, the cigar dropped out of Wodehouse’s beard, out of his fingers. He made an involuntary step back out of the Curate’s way. “By Jove!” he exclaimed to himself⁠—the news was more important to him than to either of the others. After a minute he turned his back upon them, and kicked the cigar which he had dropped out into the street with much blundering and unnecessary violence⁠—but turned round and stopped short in this occupation as soon as he heard <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Elsworthy’s voice.</p>
			<p>“She hasn’t come here,” said that virtuous woman, sharply. “I’ve give in to Elsworthy a deal, but I never said I’d give in to take her back. She’s been and disgraced us all; and she’s not a drop’s blood to me,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Elsworthy. “Them as has brought her to this pass had best look after her; I’ve washed my hands of Rosa, and all belonging to her. She knows better than to come here.”</p>
			<p>“Who’s speaking of Rosa?” said Elsworthy, who just then came in with his bundle of newspapers from the railway. “I might have know’d as it was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. Matters is going to be cleared, sir, between me and you. If you was going to make a proposal, I aint revengeful; and I’m open to any arrangement as is honourable, to save things coming afore the public. I’ve been expecting of it. You may speak free, sir. You needn’t be afraid of me.”</p>
			<p>“Fool!” said the Curate, hotly, “your niece has been seen in Carlingford; she came to my door, I am told, about an hour ago. Give up this folly, and let us make an effort to find her. I tell you she came to my house⁠—”</p>
			<p>“In course, sir,” said Elsworthy; “it was the most naturalest place for her to go. Don’t you stand upon it no longer, as if you could deceive folks. It will be your ruin, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth⁠—you know that as well as I do. I aint no fool but I’m open to a honourable proposal, I am. It’ll ruin you⁠—ay, and I’ll ruin you,” cried Rosa’s uncle, hoarsely⁠—“if you don’t change your mind afore to-morrow. It’s your last chance, if you care for your character, is to-night.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth did not condescend to make any answer. He followed Wodehouse, who had shuffled out after his cigar, and stopped him on the step. “I wonder if it is any use appealing to your honour,” he said. “I suppose you were a gentleman once, and had the feelings of⁠—”</p>
			<p>“By Jove! I’m as good a gentleman as you are,” cried the new heir. “I could buy you up⁠—you and all that belongs to you, by Jove! I’m giving Jack Wentworth a dinner at the Blue Boar to-night. I’m not a man to be cross-questioned. It appears to me you have got enough to do if you mind your own business,” said Wodehouse, with a sneer. “You’re in a nice mess, though you are the parson. I told Jack Wentworth so last night.”</p>
			<p>The Curate stood on the step of Elsworthy’s shop with his enemy behind, and the ungrateful vagabond whom he had rescued and guarded, standing in front of him, with that sneer on his lips. It was hard to refrain from the natural impulse which prompted him to pitch the vagabond out of his way. “Look here,” he said, sharply, “you have not much character to lose; but a scamp is a different thing from a criminal. I will make the principal people in Carlingford aware what were the precise circumstances under which you came here at Easter if you do not immediately restore this unhappy girl to her friends. Do you understand me? If it is not done at once I will make use of my information⁠—and you know what that means. You can defy me if you please; but in that case you had better make up your mind to the consequences; you will have to take your place as a⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Stop!” cried Wodehouse, with a shiver. “We’re not by ourselves⁠—we’re in the public street. What do you mean by talking like that here? Come to my house, Wentworth⁠—there’s a good fellow⁠—I’ve ordered a dinner⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Be silent, sir!” said the Curate. “I give you till noon to-morrow; after that I will spare you no longer. You understand what I mean. I have been too merciful already. To-morrow, if everything is not arranged to my satisfaction here⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It was my own name,” said Wodehouse, sullenly; “nobody can say it wasn’t my own name. You couldn’t do me any harm⁠—you know you wouldn’t, either, for the sake of the girls; I’ll⁠—I’ll give them a thousand pounds or so, if I find I can afford it. Come, you don’t mean that sort of thing, you know,” said the conscious criminal; “you wouldn’t do me any harm.”</p>
			<p>“If I have to fight for my own reputation I shall not spare you,” cried the Curate. “Mind what I say! You are safe till twelve o’clock to-morrow; but after that I will have no mercy⁠—not for your sisters’ sake, not for any inducement in the world. If you want to be known as a⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh Lord, don’t speak so loud!⁠—what do you mean? Wentworth, I say, hist! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth! By Jove, he won’t listen to me!” cried Wodehouse, in an agony. When he found that the Curate was already out of hearing, the vagabond looked round him on every side with his natural instinct of suspicion. If he had known that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was thinking only of disgrace and the stern sentence of public opinion, Wodehouse could have put up with it; but he himself, in his guilty imagination, jumped at the bar and the prison which had haunted him for long. Somehow it felt natural that such a Nemesis should come to him after the morning’s triumph. He stood looking after the Curate, guilty and horror-stricken, till it occurred to him that he might be remarked; and then he made a circuit past Elsworthy’s shop-window as far as the end of Prickett’s Lane, where he ventured to cross over so as to get to his own house. His own house!⁠—the wretched thrill of terror that went through him was a very sufficient offset against his momentary triumph; and this was succeeded by a flush of rage as he thought of the Curate’s other information. What was to be done? Every moment was precious; but he felt an instinctive horror of venturing out again in the daylight. When it approached the hour at which he had ordered that dinner at the Blue Boar, the humbled hero wrapped himself in an old overcoat which he found in the hall, and slunk into the inn like the clandestine wretch he was. He had no confidence in himself, but he had confidence in Jack Wentworth. He might still be able to help his unlucky associate out.</p>
			<p>When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth reached his rooms, he found that his guest had arrived before him, and consequently the threatened explanation with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin was forestalled for that night. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor and Gerald were sitting together, not at all knowing what to talk about; for the late Rector was aware that Frank Wentworth’s brother was on the verge of Rome, and was confused, and could not help feeling that his position between a man on the point of perversion in an ecclesiastical point of view, and another whose morals were suspected and whose character was compromised, was, to say the least, a very odd position for a clergyman of unblemished orthodoxy and respectability; besides, it was embarrassing, when he had come for a very private consultation, to find a stranger there before him. The Curate went in very full of what had just occurred. The events of the last two or three hours had worked a total change in his feelings. He was no longer the injured, insulted, silent object of a petty but virulent persecution. The contemptuous silence with which he had treated the scandal at first, and the still more obstinate sense of wrong which latterly had shut his lips and his heart, had given way to-day to warmer and more generous emotions. What would have seemed to him in the morning only the indignant reserve of a man unjustly suspected, appeared now a foolish and unfriendly reticence. The only thing which restrained him was a still lingering inclination to screen Wodehouse, if possible, from a public exposure, which would throw shame upon his sisters as well as himself. If any generosity, if any gentlemanly feeling, were still left in the vagabond’s soul, it was possible he might answer the Curate’s appeal; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth felt himself bound to offer no public explanation of the facts of the case until this last chance of escape had been left for the criminal. But, so far as regarded himself, his heart was opened, his wounded pride mollified, and he was ready enough to talk of what had just happened, and to explain the whole business to his anxious companions. When he joined them, indeed, he was so full of it as almost to forget that he himself was still believed the hero of the tale. “This unfortunate little girl has been here, and I have missed her,” he said, without in the least concealing his vexation, and the excitement which his rapid walk had not subdued; to the great horror of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor, who tried all he could, by telegraphic glances, to recall the young man to a sense of that fact that Sarah was in the room.</p>
			<p>“I must say I think it is imprudent⁠—highly imprudent,” said the late Rector: “they will call these women to prove that she has been here again; and what conclusion but one can possibly be drawn from such a fact? I am very sorry to see you so unguarded.” He said this, seizing the moment after Sarah had removed the salmon, which was very good, and was served with a sauce which pleased <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor all the more that he had not expected much from an impromptu dinner furnished by a Perpetual Curate; but the fact was, that Gerald’s arrival had awakened <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin to a proper regard for her own credit, which was at stake.</p>
			<p>When Sarah withdrew finally, and they were left alone, Frank Wentworth gave the fullest explanation he was able to his surprised auditors. He told them that it was Wodehouse, and not himself, whom Rosa had met in the garden, and whom she had no doubt come to seek at this crisis of their fortunes. There was not the least doubt in his own mind that Wodehouse had carried her away, and hidden her somewhere close at hand; and when he had given them all his reasons for thinking so, his hearers were of the same opinion; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor continued very doubtful and perplexed, clear though the story was. He sat silent, brooding over the new mystery, while the brothers discussed the original questions.</p>
			<p>“I cannot think why you did not go to the Rector at once and tell him all this,” said Gerald. “It is always best to put a stop to gossip. At least you will see him to-morrow, or let me see him⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The Rector is deeply prejudiced against me,” said the Perpetual Curate, “for a very unworthy reason, if he has any reason at all. He has never asked me to explain. I shall not interfere with his investigation,” said the young man, haughtily; “let it go on. I have been working here for five years, and the Carlingford people ought to know better. As for the Rector, I will make no explanations to him.”</p>
			<p>“It is not for the Rector, it is for yourself,” said Gerald; “and this fellow Wodehouse surely has no claim⁠—”</p>
			<p>But at the sound of this name, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor roused himself from his pause of bewilderment, and took the words out of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s mouth.</p>
			<p>“He has been here since Easter; but why?” said the late Rector. “I cannot fancy why <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s son should come to you when his father’s house was so near. In hiding? why was he in hiding? He is evidently a scamp,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor, growing red; “but that is not so unusual. I don’t understand⁠—I am bound to say I don’t understand it. He may be the culprit, as you say; but what was he doing here?”</p>
			<p>“I took him in at Miss Wodehouse’s request. I cannot explain why⁠—<em>she</em> will tell you,” said the Curate. “As for Wodehouse, I have given him another chance till twelve o’clock to-morrow: if he does not make his appearance then⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor had listened only to the first words; he kept moving uneasily in his seat while the Curate spoke. Then he broke in, “It appears I cannot see Miss Wodehouse,” he said, with an injured tone; “she does not see any one. I cannot ask for any explanation; but it seems to me most extraordinary. It is three months since Easter. If he had been living with you all the time, there must have been some occasion for it. I don’t know what to think, for my part; and yet I always imagined that I was considered a friend of the family,” said the late Rector, with an aggrieved look. He took his glass of claret very slowly, looking at it as if expecting to see in the purple reflection some explanation of the mystery. As for Gerald Wentworth, he relapsed into silence when he found that his arguments did not alter Frank’s decision; he too was disappointed not to find his brother alone. He sat with his eyes cast down, and a singular look of abstraction on his face. He had got into a new atmosphere⁠—a different world. When his anxieties about Frank were satisfied, Gerald withdrew himself altogether from the little party. He sat there, it is true, not unaware of what was going on, and even from time to time joining in the conversation; but already a subtle change had come over Gerald. He might have been repeating an “office,” or carrying on a course of private devotions, from his looks. Rome had established her dualism in his mind. He had no longer the unity of an Englishman trained to do one thing at a time, and to do it with his might. He sat in a kind of languor, carrying on within himself a thread of thought, to which his external occupation gave no clue; yet at the same time suffering no indication to escape him of the real condition of his mind. The three were consequently far from being good company. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor, who was more puzzled than ever as to the true state of the case, could not unburden himself of his own intentions as he had hoped to do; and after a while the Curate, too, was silent, finding his statements received, as he thought, but coldly. It was a great relief to him when he was called out by Sarah to speak to some one, though his absence made conversation still more difficult for the two who were left behind. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor, from the other side of the table, regarded Gerald with a mixture of wonder and pity. He did not feel quite sure that it was not his duty to speak to him⁠—to expound the superior catholicity of the Church of England, and call his attention to the schismatic peculiarities of the Church of Rome. “It might do him good to read Burgon’s book,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor said to himself; and by way of introducing that subject, he began to talk of Italy, which was not a bad device, and did credit to his invention. Meanwhile the Curate had gone to his study, wondering a little who could want him, and, to his utter bewilderment, found his aunt Dora, veiled, and wrapped up in a great shawl.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Frank, my dear, don’t be angry! I couldn’t help coming,” cried Miss Dora. “Come and sit down by me here. I slipped out and did not even put on my bonnet, that nobody might know. Oh, Frank, I don’t know what to say. I am so afraid you have been wicked. I have just seen that⁠—that girl. I saw her out of my window. Frank! don’t jump up like that. I can’t go on telling you if you don’t stay quiet here.”</p>
			<p>“Aunt, let me understand you,” cried the Curate. “You saw whom? Rosa Elsworthy? Don’t drive me desperate, as all the others do with their stupidity. You saw her? when?⁠—where?”</p>
			<p>“Oh Frank, Frank! to think it should put you in such a way⁠—such a girl as that! Oh, my dear boy, if I had thought you cared so much, I never would have come to tell you. It wasn’t to encourage you⁠—it wasn’t. Oh, Frank, Frank! that it should come to this!” cried Miss Dora, shrinking back from him with fright and horror in her face.</p>
			<p>“Come, we have no time to lose,” said the Curate, who was desperate. He picked up her shawl, which had fallen on the floor, and bundled her up in it in the most summary way. “Come, aunt Dora,” said the impetuous young man; “you know you were always my kindest friend. Nobody else can help me at this moment. I feel that you are going to be my deliverer. Come, aunt Dora⁠—we must go and find her, you and I. There is not a moment to lose.”</p>
			<p>He had his arm round her, holding on her shawl. He raised her up from her chair, and supported her, looking at her as he had not done before since he was a boy at school, Miss Dora thought. She was too frightened, too excited, to cry, as she would have liked to do; but the proposal was so terrible and unprecedented that she leaned back trembling on her nephew’s arm, and could not move either to obey or to resist him. “Oh, Frank, I never went after any improper person in my life,” gasped aunt Dora. “Oh, my dear, don’t make me do anything that is wrong; they will say it is my fault!” cried the poor lady, gradually feeling herself obliged to stand on her feet and collect her forces. The shawl fell back from her shoulders as the Curate withdrew his arm. “You have lost my large pin,” cried aunt Dora, in despair; “and I have no bonnet. And oh! what will Leonora say? I never, never would have come to tell you if I had thought of this. I only came to warn you, Frank. I only intended⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the Curate. The emergency was momentous, and he dared not lose patience. He found her large pin even, while she stood trembling, and stuck it into her shawl as if it had been a skewer. “You never would have come if you had not been my guardian angel,” said the deceitful young man, whose heart was beating high with anxiety and hope. “Nobody else would do for me what you are going to do⁠—but I have always had confidence in my aunt Dora. Come, come! We have not a moment to lose.”</p>
			<p>This was how he overcame Miss Dora’s scruples. Before she knew what had happened she was being hurried through the clear summer night past the long garden-walls of Grange Lane. The stars were shining overhead, the leaves rustling on all sides in the soft wind⁠—not a soul to be seen in the long line of darkling road. Miss Dora had no breath to speak, however much disposed she might have been. She could not remonstrate, having full occasion for all her forces to keep her feet and her breath. When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth paused for an instant to ask “which way did she go?” it was all Miss Dora could do to indicate with her finger the dark depths of Prickett’s Lane. Thither she was immediately carried as by a whirlwind. With a shawl over her head, fastened together wildly by the big pin⁠—with nothing but little satin slippers, quite unfit for the exertion required of them⁠—with an agonised protest in her heart that she had never, never in her life gone after any improper person before⁠—and, crowning misfortune of all, with a horrible consciousness that she had left the garden-door open, hoping to return in a few minutes, Miss Dora Wentworth, single woman as she was, and ignorant of evil, was whirled off in pursuit of the unfortunate Rosa into the dark abysses of Prickett’s Lane.</p>
			<p>While this terrible Hegira was taking place, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor sat opposite Gerald Wentworth, sipping his claret and talking of Italy. “Perhaps you have not read Burgon’s book,” said the late Rector. “There is a good deal of valuable information in it about the Catacombs, and he enters at some length into the question between the Roman Church and our own. If you are interested in that, you should read it,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor; “it is a very important question.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Gerald; and then there followed a pause. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor did not know what to make of the faint passing smile, the abstracted look, which he had vaguely observed all the evening; and he looked so inquiringly across the table that Gerald’s new-born dualism came immediately into play, to the great amazement of his companion. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth talked, and talked well; but his eyes were still abstracted, his mind was still otherwise occupied; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor, whose own intelligence was in a state of unusual excitement, perceived the fact without being at all able to explain it. An hour passed, and both the gentlemen looked at their watches. The Curate had left them abruptly enough, with little apology; and as neither of them had much interest in the other, nor in the conversation, it was natural that the host’s return should be looked for with some anxiety. When the two gentlemen had said all they could say about Italy⁠—when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor had given a little sketch of his own experiences in Rome, to which his companion did not make the usual response of narrating his⁠—the two came to a dead pause. They had now been sitting for more than two hours over that bottle of Lafitte, many thoughts having in the mean time crossed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor’s mind concerning the coffee and the Curate. Where could he have gone? and why was there not somebody in the house with sense enough to clear away the remains of dessert, and refresh the wearied interlocutors with the black and fragrant cup which cheers all students? Both of the gentlemen had become seriously uneasy by this time; the late Rector got up from the table when he could bear it no longer. “Your brother must have been called away by something important,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor, stiffly. “Perhaps you will kindly make my excuses. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan keeps very regular hours, and I should not like to be late⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is very extraordinary. I can’t fancy what can be the reason⁠—it must be somebody sick,” said Gerald, rising too, but not looking by any means sure that Frank’s absence had such a laudable excuse.</p>
			<p>“Very likely,” said the late Rector, more stiffly than ever. “You are living here, I suppose?”</p>
			<p>“No; I am at Miss Wentworth’s⁠—my aunt’s,” said Gerald. “I will walk with you;” and they went out together with minds considerably excited. Both looked up and down the road when they got outside the garden-gate: both had a vague idea that the Curate might be visible somewhere in conversation with somebody disreputable; and one being his friend and the other his brother, they were almost equally disturbed about the unfortunate young man. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor’s thoughts, however, were mingled with a little offence. He had meant to be confidential and brotherly, and the occasion had been lost; and how was it possible to explain the rudeness with which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth had treated him? Gerald was still more seriously troubled. When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor left him, he walked up and down Grange Lane in the quiet of the summer night, watching for his brother. Jack came home smoking his cigar, dropping Wodehouse, whom the heir of the Wentworths declined to call his friend, before he reached his aunts’ door, and as much surprised as it was possible for him to be, to find Gerald lingering, meditating, along the silent road; but still Frank did not come. By-and-by a hurried light gleamed in the window of the summer-house, and sounds of commotion were audible in the orderly dwelling of the Miss Wentworths; and the next thing that happened was the appearance of Miss Leonora, also with a shawl over her head, at the garden-door. Just then, when they were all going to bed, Collins, Miss Dora’s maid, had come to the drawing-room in search of her mistress. She was not to be found anywhere, though her bonnets and all her outdoor gear were safe in their place. For the first time in her life the entire family were startled into anxiety on Miss Dora’s account. As for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gerald Wentworth, she jumped at once to the conclusion that the poor lady was murdered, and that Frank must have something to do with it, and filled the house with lamentations. Nobody went to bed, not even aunt Cecilia, who had not been out of her room at eleven o’clock for centuries. Collins had gone into the summer-house and was turning over everything there as if she expected to find her mistress’s body in the cupboard or under the sofa; Lewis, the butler, was hunting through the garden with a lantern, looking under all the bushes. No incident so utterly unaccountable had occurred before in Miss Dora Wentworth’s life.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
