<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
			<p>Next day the Miss Wentworths made a solemn call at the Rectory, having known an aunt of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan at some period of their history, and being much disposed, besides, with natural curiosity, to ascertain all about their nephew’s circumstances. Their entrance interrupted a consultation between the Rector and his wife. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan was slightly heated, and had evidently been talking about something that excited him; while she, poor lady, looked just sufficiently sympathetic and indignant to withdraw her mind from that first idea which usually suggested itself on the entrance of visitors⁠—which was, what could they possibly think of her if they supposed the carpet, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to be her own choice? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan cast her eye with a troubled look upon the big card which had been brought to her⁠—Miss Wentworth, Miss Leonora Wentworth, Miss Dora Wentworth. “Sisters of his, I suppose, William,” she said in an undertone; “now <em>do</em> be civil, dear.” There was no time for anything more before the three ladies sailed in. Miss Leonora took the initiative, as was natural.</p>
			<p>“You don’t remember us, I daresay,” she said, taking <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan’s hand; “we used to know your aunt Sidney, when she lived at the Hermitage. Don’t you recollect the Miss Wentworths of Skelmersdale? Charley Sidney spent part of his furlough with us last summer, and Ada writes about you often. We could not be in Carlingford without coming to see the relation of such a dear friend.”</p>
			<p>“I am so glad to see anybody who knows my aunt Sidney,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, with modified enthusiasm. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan, Miss Wentworth. It was such a dear little house that Hermitage. I spent some very happy days there. Oh yes, I recollect Skelmersdale perfectly; but, to tell the truth, there is one of the clergy in Carlingford called Wentworth, and I thought it might be some relations of his coming to call.”</p>
			<p>“Just so,” said Miss Wentworth, settling herself in the nearest easy-chair.</p>
			<p>“And so it is,” cried Miss Dora; “we are his aunts, dear boy⁠—we are very fond of him. We came on purpose to see him. We are so glad to hear that he is liked in Carlingford.”</p>
			<p>“Oh⁠—yes,” said the Rector’s wife, and nobody else took any notice of Miss Dora’s little outburst. As for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan, he addressed Miss Leonora as if she had done something particularly naughty, and he had a great mind to give her an imposition. “You have not been very long in Carlingford, I suppose,” said the Rector, as if that were a sin.</p>
			<p>“Only since Saturday,” said Miss Leonora. “We came to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Frank Wentworth, who is at <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s. I don’t know what your bishop is about, to permit all those flowers and candlesticks. For my part, I never disguise my sentiments. I mean to tell my nephew plainly that his way of conducting the service is far from being to my mind.”</p>
			<p>“Leonora, dear, perhaps <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan would speak to Frank about it,” interposed Miss Dora, anxiously; “he was always a dear boy, and advice was never lost upon him. From one that he respected so much as he must respect the Rector⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon. I quite decline interfering with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth; he is not at all under my jurisdiction. Indeed,” said the Rector, with a smile of anger, “I might be more truly said to be under his, for he is good enough to help in my parish without consulting me; but that is not to the purpose. I would not for the world attempt to interfere with <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s.”</p>
			<p>“Dear, I am sure <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth is very nice, and everything we have seen of him in private we have liked very much,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, with an anxious look at her husband. She was a good-natured woman, and the handsome Curate had impressed her favourably, notwithstanding his misdoings. “As for a little too much of the rubric, I think that is not a bad fault in a young man. It gets softened down with a little experience; and I do like proper solemnity in the services of the Church.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t call intoning proper solemnity,” said Miss Leonora. “The Church is a missionary institution, that is my idea. Unless you are really bringing in the perishing and saving souls, what is the good? and souls will never be saved by Easter decorations. I don’t know what my nephew may have done to offend you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan; but it is very sad to us, who have very strong convictions on the subject, to see him wasting his time so. I daresay there is plenty of heathenism in Carlingford which might be attacked in the first place.”</p>
			<p>“I prefer not to discuss the subject,” said the Rector. “So long as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, or any other clergyman, keeps to his own sphere of duty, I should be the last in the world to interfere with him.”</p>
			<p>“You are offended with Frank,” said Miss Leonora, fixing her iron-grey eyes upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan. “So am I; but I should be glad if you would tell me all about it. I have particular reasons for wishing to know. After all, he is only a young man,” she continued, with that instinct of kindred which dislikes to hear censure from any lips but its own. “I don’t think there can be anything more than inadvertence in it. I should be glad if you would tell me what you object to in him. I think it is probable that he may remain a long time in Carlingford,” said Miss Leonora, with charming candour, “and it would be pleasant if we could help to set him right. Your advice and experience might be of so much use to him.” She was not aware of the covert sarcasm of her speech. She did not know that the Rector’s actual experience, though he was half as old again as her nephew, bore no comparison to that of the Perpetual Curate. She spoke in good faith and good nature, not moved in her own convictions of what must be done in respect to Skelmersdale, but very willing, if that were possible, to do a good turn to Frank.</p>
			<p>“I am sure, dear, what we have seen of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth in private, we have liked very much,” said the Rector’s sensible wife, with a deprecating glance towards her husband. The Rector took no notice of the glance; he grew slightly red in his serious middle-aged face, and cleared his throat several times before he began to speak.</p>
			<p>“The fact is, I have reason to be dissatisfied with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, as regards my own parish,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan: “personally I have nothing to say against him⁠—quite the reverse; probably, as you say, it arises from inadvertence, as he is still a very young man; but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What has he done?” said Miss Leonora, pricking up her ears.</p>
			<p>Once more <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan cleared his throat, but this time it was to keep down the rising anger of which he was unpleasantly sensible. “I don’t generally enter into such matters with people whom they don’t concern,” he said, with a touch of his natural asperity; “but as you are <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s relation⁠—. He has taken a step perfectly unjustifiable in every respect; he has at the present moment a mission going on in my parish, in entire independence, I will not say defiance, of me. My dear, it is unnecessary to look at me so deprecatingly. I am indignant at having such a liberty taken with me. I don’t pretend not to be indignant. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth is a very young man, and may not know any better; but it is the most unwarrantable intrusion upon a clergyman’s rights. I beg your pardon, Miss Wentworth: you have nothing to do with my grievances; but the fact is, my wife and I were discussing this very unpleasant matter when you came in.”</p>
			<p>“A mission in your parish?” said Miss Leonora, her iron-grey eyes lighting up with a sparkle which did not look like indignation; at this point it was necessary that Miss Dora should throw herself into the breach.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan, I am sure my dear Frank does not mean it!” cried the unlucky peacemaker; “he would not for the world do anything to wound anybody’s feelings⁠—it must be a mistake.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan would not have mentioned it if we had not just been talking as you came in,” said the Rector’s wife, by way of smoothing down his ruffled temper and giving him time to recover. “I feel <em>sure</em> it is a mistake, and that everything will come right as soon as they can talk it over by themselves. The last Rector was not at all a working clergyman⁠—and perhaps <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth felt it was his duty⁠—and now I daresay he forgets that it is not his own parish. It will all come right after a time.”</p>
			<p>“But the mission is effective, I suppose, or you would not object to it?” said Miss Leonora, who, though a very religious woman, was not a peacemaker; and the Rector, whose temper was hasty, swallowed the bait. He entered into his grievances more fully than his wife thought consistent with his dignity. She sat with her eyes fixed upon the floor, tracing the objectionable pattern on the carpet with her foot, but too much vexed for the moment to think of those bouquets which were so severe a cross to her on ordinary occasions. Perhaps she was thinking secretly to herself how much better one knows a man after being married to him three months than after being engaged to him ten years; but the discovery that he was merely a man after all, with very ordinary defects, did not lessen her loyalty. She sat with her eyes bent upon the carpet, feeling a little hot and uncomfortable as her husband disclosed his weakness, and watching her opportunities to rush in and say a softening word now and then. The chances were, perhaps, on the whole, that the wife grew <em>more</em> loyal, if that were possible, as she perceived the necessity of standing by him and backing him out. The Rector went very fully into the subject, being drawn out by Miss Leonora’s questions, and betrayed an extent of information strangely opposed to the utter ignorance which he had displayed at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s party. He knew the hours of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s services, and the number of people who attended, and even about Tom Burrows’s six children who had been baptised the day before. Somehow <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan took this last particular as a special offence; it was this which had roused him beyond his usual self-control. Six little heathens brought into the Christian fold in his own parish without the permission of the Rector! It was indeed enough to try any clergyman’s temper. Through the entire narrative Miss Dora broke in now and then with a little wail expressive of her general dismay and grief, and certainty that her dear Frank did not mean it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan repeated apart to Miss Wentworth with a troubled brow the fact that all they had seen of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth in private they had liked very much; to which aunt Cecilia answered, “Quite so,” with her beautiful smile; while Miss Leonora sat and listened, putting artful questions, and fixing the heated Rector with that iron-grey eye, out of which the sparkle of incipient light had not faded. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan naturally said a great deal more than he meant to say, and after it was said he was sorry; but he did not show the latter sentiment except by silence and an uneasy rustling about the room just before the Miss Wentworths rose to go⁠—a sign apparent to his wife, though to nobody else. He gave Miss Wentworth his arm to the door with an embarrassed courtesy. “If you are going to stay any time at Carlingford, I trust we shall see more of you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan: “I ought to beg your pardon for taking up so much time with my affairs;” and the Rector was much taken aback when Miss Wentworth answered, “Thank you, that is just what I was thinking.” He went back to his troubled wife in great perplexity. What was it that was just what she was thinking?⁠—that he would see more of them, or that he had spoken too much of his own affairs?</p>
			<p>“You think I have been angry and made an idiot of myself,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan to his wife, who was standing looking from a safe distance through the curtains at the three ladies, who were holding a consultation with their servant out of the window of the solemn chariot provided by the Blue Boar, as to where they were to go next.</p>
			<p>“Nonsense, dear; but I wish you had not said quite so much about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth,” said the Rector’s wife, seizing, with female art, on a cause for her annoyance which would not wound her Welshman’s amour propre, “for I rather think he is dependent on his aunts. They have the living of Skelmersdale, I know; and I remember now that their nephew was to have had it. I hope this won’t turn them against him, dear,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, who did not care the least in the world about Skelmersdale, looking anxiously in her husband’s face.</p>
			<p>This was the climax of the Rector’s trouble. “Why did not you tell me that before?” he said, with conjugal injustice, and went off to his study with a disturbed mind, thinking that perhaps he had injured his own chances of getting rid of the Perpetual Curate. If <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan had permitted herself to soliloquise after he was gone, the matter of her thoughts might have been interesting; but as neither ladies nor gentlemen in the nineteenth century are given to that useful medium of disclosing their sentiments, the veil of privacy must remain over the mind of the Rector’s wife. She got her gardening gloves and scissors, and went out immediately after, and had an animated discussion with the gardener about the best means of clothing that bit of wall, over which every railway train was visible which left or entered Carlingford. That functionary was of opinion that when the lime-trees “growed a bit” all would be right: but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan was reluctant to await the slow processes of nature. She forgot her vexations about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth in consideration of the still more palpable inconvenience of the passing train.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
