<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>Very little came, as was natural, of the talk in the library, to which the entire afternoon was devoted. The Squire, in his way, was as great an interruption to the arguments of the Curate as was poor Louisa in hers; and Gerald sat patiently to listen to his father’s indignant monologue, broken as it was by Frank’s more serious attacks. He was prepared for all they could say to him, and listened to it, sometimes with a kind of wondering smile, knowing well how much more strongly, backed by all his prejudices and interests, he had put the same arguments to himself. All this time nobody discussed the practicability of the matter much, nor what steps he meant to take: what immediately occupied both his father and brother was his determination itself, and the reasons which had led him to it, which the Squire, like Louisa, could not understand.</p>
			<p>“If I had made myself disagreeable,” said Mr. Wentworth; “if I had remonstrated with him, as Leonora urged me to do; if I had put a stop to the surplice and so forth, and interfered with his decorations or his saints’ days, or anything, it might have been comprehensible. But I never said a syllable on the subject. I give you my word, I never did. Why couldn’t he have sent down for Louisa now, and dined at the Hall, as usual, when any of my sons come home? I suppose a man may change his religion, sir, without getting rid of his natural affections,” said the Squire, gazing out with puzzled looks to watch Gerald going slowly down the avenue. “A man who talks of leaving his wife, and declines to dine at his father’s house with his brothers and sisters, is a mystery I can’t understand.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t suppose he cares for a lively party like ours at this moment,” said the Curate: “I don’t take it as any sign of a want of affection for me.”</p>
			<p>The Squire puffed forth a large sigh of trouble and vexation as he came from the window. “If <i>I</i> were to give in to trouble when it appears, what would become of our lively party, I wonder?” he said. “I’m getting an old man, Frank; but there’s not a young man in Christendom has more need to take care of himself, and preserve his health, than I have. I am very well, thank God, though I have had a touch of our Wentworth complaint⁠—just one touch. My father had it ten years earlier in life, and lived to eighty, all the same; but that is an age I shall never see. Such worries as I have would kill any man. I’ve not spoken to anybody about it,” said the Squire, hastily, “but Jack is going a terrible pace just now. I’ve had a good deal of bother about bills and things. He gets worse every year; and what would become of the girls and the little children if the estate were to come into Jack’s hands, is a thought I don’t like to dwell upon, Frank. I suppose he never writes to you?”</p>
			<p>“Not for years past,” said the Curate⁠—“not since I was at Oxford. Where is he now?”</p>
			<p>“Somewhere about town, I suppose,” said the aggrieved father, “or wherever the greatest scamps collect when they go out of town⁠—that’s where he is. I could show you a little document or two, Frank⁠—but now,” said the Squire, shutting up a drawer which he had unlocked and partly opened, “I won’t; you’ve enough on your mind with Gerald, and I told you I should be glad of your advice about Cuthbert and Guy.”</p>
			<p>Upon which the father and son plunged into family affairs. Cuthbert and Guy were the youngest of the Squire’s middle family⁠—a “lot” which included Frank and Charley and the three sisters, one of whom was married. The domestic relations of the Wentworths were complicated in this generation. Jack and Gerald were of the first marriage, a period in his history which Mr. Wentworth himself had partly forgotten; and the troop of children at present in the Hall nursery were quite beyond the powers of any grown-up brother to recognise or identify. It was vaguely understood that “the girls” knew all the small fry by head and name, but even the Squire himself was apt to get puzzled. With such a household, and with an heir impending over his head like Jack, it may be supposed that Mr. Wentworth’s anxiety to get his younger boys disposed of was great. Cuthbert and Guy were arrows in the hand of the giant, but he had his quiver so full that the best thing he could do was to draw his bow and shoot them away into as distant and as fresh a sphere as possible. They were sworn companions and allies, but they were not clever, Mr. Wentworth believed, and he was very glad to consult over New Zealand and Australia, and which was best, with their brother Frank.</p>
			<p>“They are good boys,” said their father, “but they have not any brains to speak of⁠—not like Gerald and you;⁠—though, after all, I begin to be doubtful what’s the good of brains,” added the Squire, disconsolately, “if this is all that comes of them. After building so much on Gerald for years, and feeling that one might live to see him a bishop⁠—but, however, there’s still <i>you</i> left; you’re all right, Frank?”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, I am all right,” said the Curate, with a sigh; “but neither Gerald nor I are the stuff that bishops are made of,” he added, laughing. “I hope you don’t dream of any such honour for me.”</p>
			<p>But the Squire was too troubled in his mind for laughter. “Jack was always clever, too,” he said, dolefully, “and little good has come of that. I hope he won’t disgrace the family any more than he has done, in my time, Frank. You young fellows have all your life before you; but when a man comes to my age, and expects a little comfort, it’s hard to be dragged into the mire after his children. I did my duty by Jack too⁠—I can say that for myself. He had the same training as Gerald had⁠—the same tutor at the university⁠—everything just the same. How do you account for that, sir, you that are a philosopher?” said Mr. Wentworth again, with a touch of irritation. “Own brothers both by father and mother; brought up in the same house, same school and college and everything; and all the time as different from each other as light and darkness. How do you account for that? Though, to be sure, here’s Gerald taken to bad ways too. It must have been some weakness by their mother’s side. Poor girl! she died too young to show it herself; but it’s come out in her children,” said the vexed Squire. “Though it’s a poor sort of thing to blame them that are gone,” he added, with penitence; and he got up and paced uneasily about the room. Who was there else to blame? Not himself, for he had done his duty by his boys. Mr. Wentworth never was disturbed in mind, without, as his family were well aware, becoming excited in temper too; and the unexpected nature of the new trouble had somehow added a keener touch of exasperation to his perennial dissatisfaction with his heir. “If Jack had been the man he ought to have been, his advice might have done some good⁠—for a clergyman naturally sees things in a different light from a man of the world,” said the troubled father; and Frank perceived that he too shared in his father’s displeasure, because he was not Jack, nor a man of the world; notwithstanding that, being Frank and a clergyman, he was acknowledged by public opinion to be the Squire’s favourite in the family. Things continued in this uncomfortable state up to the dinner-hour, so that the Curate, even had his own feelings permitted it, had but little comfort in his home visit. At dinner Mr. Wentworth did not eat, and awoke the anxiety of his wife, who drove the old gentleman into a state of desperation by inquiries after his health.</p>
			<p>“Indeed, I wish you would remonstrate with your papa, Frank,” said his stepmother, who was not a great deal older than the Curate. “After his attack he ought to be more careful. But he never takes the least trouble about himself, no more than if he were five-and-twenty. After getting such a knock on the forehead too; and you see he eats nothing. I shall be miserable if the doctor is not sent for to-night.”</p>
			<p>“Stuff!” cried the Squire, testily. “Perhaps you will speak to the cook about these messes she insists on sending up to disgust one, and leave me to take care of my own health. Don’t touch that dish, Frank; it’s poison. I am glad Gerald is not here: he’d think we never had a dinner without that confounded mixture. And then the wonder is that one can’t eat!” said Mr. Wentworth, in a tone which spread consternation round the table. Mrs. Wentworth secretly put her handkerchief to her eyes behind the great cover, which had not yet been removed; and one of the girls dashed in violently to the rescue, of course making everything worse.</p>
			<p>“Why did not Gerald and Louisa come to dinner?” cried the ignorant sister. “Surely, when they knew Frank had come, they would have liked to be here. How very odd it was of you not to ask them, papa! they always do come when anybody has arrived. Why aren’t they here to-night?”</p>
			<p>“Because they don’t choose to come,” said the Squire, abruptly. “If Gerald has reasons for staying away from his father’s house, what is that to you? Butterflies,” said Mr. Wentworth, looking at them in their pretty dresses, as they sat regarding him with dismay, “that don’t understand any reason for doing anything except liking it or not liking it. I daresay by this time your sister knows better.”</p>
			<p>“My sister is married, papa,” said Letty, with her saucy look.</p>
			<p>“I advise you to get married too, and learn what life is like,” said the savage Squire; and conversation visibly flagged after this effort. When the ladies got safely into the drawing-room, they gathered into a corner to consult over it. They were all naturally anxious about him after his “attack.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you remember he was just like this before it came on?” said Mrs. Wentworth, nervously; “so cross, and finding fault with the made dishes. Don’t you think I might send over a message to Dr. Small⁠—not to come on purpose, you know, but just as if it were a call in passing?”</p>
			<p>But the girls both agreed this would make matters worse.</p>
			<p>“It must be something about Jack,” they both said in a breath, in a kind of awe of their elder brother, of whom they had a very imperfect knowledge. “And it seems we never are to have a chance of a word with Frank!” cried Letty, who was indignant and exasperated. But at least it was a consolation that “the boys” were no better off. All next day Cuthbert and Guy hung about in the vain hope of securing the company and attention of the visitor. He was at the Rectory the whole morning, sometimes with Gerald, sometimes with Louisa, as the scouts of the family, consisting of a variety of brothers, little and big, informed the anxious girls. And Louisa was seen to cry on one of these occasions; and Gerald looked cross, said one little spy, whereupon he had his ears boxed, and was dismissed from the service. “As if Gerald ever looked anything but a saint!” said the younger sister, who was an advanced Anglican. Letty, however, holding other views, confuted this opinion strongly: “When one thinks of a saint, it is aunt Leonora one thinks of,” said this profane young woman. “I’ll tell you what Gerald looks like⁠—something just half-way between a conqueror and a martyr. I think, of all the men I ever saw, he is my hero,” said Letty, meditatively. The youngest Miss Wentworth was not exactly of this latter opinion, but she did not contradict her sister. They were kept in a state of watchfulness all day, but Frank’s mission remained a mystery which they could not penetrate; and in the evening Gerald alone made his appearance at the hall to dinner, explaining that Louisa had a headache. Now Louisa’s headaches were not unfrequent, but they were known to improve in the prospect of going out to dinner. On the whole, the matter was wrapt in obscurity, and the Wentworth household could not explain it. The sisters sat up brushing their hair, and looking very pretty in their dressing-gowns, with their bright locks (for the Wentworth hair was golden-brown of a Titian hue) over their shoulders, discussing the matter till it was long past midnight; but they could make nothing of it, and the only conclusion they came to was, that their two clergymen brothers were occupied in negotiating with the Squire about some secret not known to the rest of the family, but most probably concerning Jack. Jack was almost unknown to his sisters, and awoke no very warm anxiety in their minds; so they went to sleep at last in tolerable quiet, concluding that whatever mystery there was concerned only the first-born and least loved of the house.</p>
			<p>While the girls pursued these innocent deliberations, and reasoned themselves into conviction, the Squire too sat late⁠—much later than usual. He had gone with Frank to the library, and sat there in half-stupefied quietness, which the Curate could not see without alarm, and from which he roused himself up now and then to wander off into talk, which always began with Gerald, and always came back to his own anxieties and his disappointed hopes in his eldest son. “If Jack had been the man he ought to have been, I’d have telegraphed for him, and he’d have managed it all,” said the Squire, and then relapsed once more into silence. “For neither you nor I are men of the world, Frank,” he would resume again, after a pause of half an hour, revealing pitifully how his mind laboured under the weight of this absorbing thought. The Curate sat up with him in the dimly-lighted library, feeling the silence and the darkness to his heart. He could not assist his father in those dim ranges of painful meditation. Grieved as he was, he could not venture to compare his own distress with the bitterness of the Squire, disappointed in all his hopes and in the pride of his heart; and then the young man saw compensations and heroisms in Gerald’s case which were invisible to the unheroic eyes of Mr. Wentworth, who looked at it entirely from a practical point of view, and regarded with keen mortification an event which would lay all the affairs of the Wentworths open to general discussion, and invite the eye of the world to a renewed examination of his domestic skeletons. Everything had been hushed and shut up in the Hall for at least an hour, when the Squire got up at last and lighted his candle, and held out his hand to his son⁠—“This isn’t a very cheerful visit for you, Frank,” he said; “but we’ll try again to-morrow, and have one other talk with Gerald. Couldn’t you read up some books on the subject, or think of something new to say to him? God bless my soul! if I were as young and as much accustomed to talking as you are, I’d surely find out some argument,” said the Squire, with a momentary spark of temper, which made his son feel more comfortable about him. “It’s your business to convince a man when he’s wrong. We’ll try Gerald once more, and perhaps something may come of it; and as for Jack⁠—” Here the Squire paused, and shook his head, and let go his son’s hand. “I suppose it’s sitting up so late that makes one feel so cold and wretched, and as if one saw ghosts,” said Mr. Wentworth. “Don’t stay here any longer, and take care of the candles. I ought to have been in bed two hours ago. Good-night.”</p>
			<p>And as he walked away, the Curate could not but observe what an aged figure it looked, moving with a certain caution to the door. The great library was so dim that the light of the candle which the Squire carried in his hand was necessary to reveal his figure clearly, and there was no mistaking his air of age and feebleness. The Curate’s thoughts were not very agreeable when he was left by himself in the half-lighted room. His imagination jumped to a picture very possible, but grievous to think of⁠—Jack seated in his father’s place, and “the girls” and the little children turned out upon the world. In such a case, who would be their protector and natural guardian? Not Gerald, who was about to divest himself of ties still closer and more sacred. The Curate lit his candle too, and went hastily to his room when that thought came upon him. There might be circumstances still more hopeless and appalling than the opposition of a rector or the want of a benefice. He preferred to return to his anxiety about Gerald, and to put away that thought, as he went hurriedly up-stairs.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
