<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth got back to Carlingford by a happy concurrence of trains before the town had gone to sleep. It was summer, when the days are at the longest, and the twilight was just falling into night as he took his way through George Street. He went along the familiar street with a certain terror of looking into people’s faces whom he met, and of asking questions, such as was natural to a man who did not know whether something of public note might not have happened in his absence to call attention to his name. He imagined, indeed, that he did see a strange expression in the looks of the townsfolk he encountered on his way. He thought they looked at him askance as they made their salutations, and said something to each other after they passed, which, indeed, in several cases was true enough, though the cause was totally different from anything suspected by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. Anxious to know, and yet unwilling to ask, it was with a certain relief that the Curate saw the light gleaming out from the open door of Elsworthy’s shop as he approached. He went in and tossed down his travelling-bag on the counter, and threw himself on the solitary chair which stood outside for the accommodation of customers, with a suppressed excitement, which made his question sound abrupt and significant to the ears of Elsworthy. “Has anything happened since I went away?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, throwing a glance round the shop which alarmed his faithful retainer. Somehow, though nothing was farther from his mind than little Rosa, or any thought of her, the Curate missed the pretty little figure at the first glance.</p>
			<p>“Well⁠—no, sir; not much as I’ve heard of,” said Elsworthy, with a little confusion. He was tying up his newspapers as usual, but it did not require the touch of suspicion and anxiety which gave sharpness to the Curate’s eyes to make it apparent that the cord was trembling in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy’s hand. “I hope you’ve had a pleasant journey, sir, and a comfortable visit⁠—it’s been but short⁠—but we always miss you in Carlingford, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, if it was only for a day.”</p>
			<p>“I’ll take my paper,” said the young man, who was not satisfied⁠—“so there’s no news, isn’t there?⁠—all well, and everything going on as usual?” And the look which the suspicious Curate bent upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy made that virtuous individual, as he himself described it, “shake in his shoes.”</p>
			<p>“Much as usual, sir,” said the frightened clerk⁠—“nothing new as I hear of but gossip, and that aint a thing to interest a clergyman. There’s always one report or another flying about, but them follies aint for your hearing. Nothing more,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy, conscious of guilt, and presenting a very tremulous countenance to the inspection of his suspicious auditor, “not if it was my last word⁠—nothing but gossip, as you wouldn’t care to hear.”</p>
			<p>“I might possibly care to hear if it concerned myself,” said the Curate⁠—“or anybody I am interested in,” he added, after a little pause, with rather a forced smile⁠—which convinced <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy that his clergyman had heard all about Rosa, and that the days of his incumbency as clerk of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s were numbered.</p>
			<p>“Well, sir, if you did hear, it aint no blame of mine,” said the injured bookseller; “such a notion would never have come into my mind⁠—no man, I make bold to say, is more particular about keeping to his own rank of life nor me. What you did, sir, you did out of the kindness of your heart, and I’d sooner sell up and go off to the end of the world than impose upon a gentleman. Her aunt’s took her away,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy, lowering his voice, and cautiously pointing to the back of the shop⁠—“She’ll not bother you no more.”</p>
			<p>“She!⁠—who?” cried the Perpetual Curate, in sudden consternation. He was utterly bewildered by the introduction of a female actor into the little drama, and immediately ran over in his mind all the women he could think of who could, by any possibility, be involved in mysterious relations with his brother Jack.</p>
			<p>“She’s but a child,” said Elsworthy, pathetically; “she don’t know nothing about the ways o’ the world. If she was a bit proud o’ being noticed, there wasn’t no harm in that. But seeing as there’s nothing in this world that folks won’t make a talk of when they’ve started, her aunt, as is very partic’lar, has took her away. Not as I’m meaning no reproach to you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth; but she’s a loss to us, is Rosa. She was a cheerful little thing, say the worst of her,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy; “going a-singing and a-chirping out and in the shop; and I won’t deny as the place looks desolate, now she’s away. But that aint neither here nor there. It was for her good, as my missis says. Most things as is unpleasant <em>is</em> sent for good, they tell me; and I wouldn’t⁠—not for any comfort to myself⁠—have a talk got up about the clergyman⁠—”</p>
			<p>By this time <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth had awakened to a sense of the real meaning of Elsworthy’s talk. He sat upright on his chair, and looked into the face of the worthy shopkeeper until the poor man trembled. “A talk about the clergyman?” said the Curate. “About me, do you mean? and what has little Rosa to do with me? Have you gone crazy in Carlingford⁠—what is the meaning of it all?” He sat with his elbows on the counter, looking at his trembling adherent⁠—looking through and through him, as Elsworthy said. “I should be glad of an explanation; what does it mean?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with a look which there was no evading; and the clerk of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s cast an anxious glance round him for help. He would have accepted it from any quarter at that overwhelming moment; but there was not even an errand-boy to divert from him the Curate’s terrible eyes.</p>
			<p>“I⁠—I don’t know⁠—I⁠—can’t tell how it got up,” said the unhappy man, who had not even his “missis” in the parlour as a moral support. “One thing as I know is, it wasn’t no blame o’ mine. I as good as went down on my knees to them three respected ladies when they come to inquire. I said as it was kindness in you a-seeing of the child home, and didn’t mean nothing more. I ask you, sir, what could I do?” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy. “Folks in Carlingford will talk o’ two straws if they’re a-seen a-blowing up Grange Lane on the same breath o’ wind. I couldn’t do no more nor contradict it,” cried Rosa’s guardian, getting excited in his self-defence; “and to save your feelings, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, and put it out o’ folks’s power to talk, the missis has been and took her away.”</p>
			<p>“To save my feelings!” said the Curate, with a laugh of contempt and vexation and impatience which it was not pleasant to hear. At another moment an accusation so ridiculous would have troubled him very little; but just now, with a sudden gleam of insight, he saw all the complications which might spring out of it to confuse further the path which he already felt to be so burdened. “I’ll tell you what, Elsworthy,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth; “if you don’t want to make me your enemy instead of your friend, you’ll send for this child instantly, without a day’s delay. Tell your wife that my orders are that she should come back directly. <em>My</em> feelings! do the people in Carlingford think me an idiot, I wonder?” said the Curate, walking up and down to relieve his mind.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know, sir, I’m sure,” said Elsworthy, who thought some answer was required of him. To tell the truth, Rosa’s uncle felt a little spiteful. He did not see matters in exactly the same light as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth did. At the bottom of his heart, after all, lay a thrill of awakened ambition. Kings and princes had been known to marry far out of their degree for the sake of a beautiful face; and why a Perpetual Curate should be so much more lofty in his sentiments, puzzled and irritated the clerk of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s. “There aint a worm but will turn when he’s trod upon,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy to himself; and when his temper was roused, he became impertinent, according to the manner of his kind.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth gave him a quick look, struck by the changed tone, but unable to make out whether it might not be stupidity. “You understand what I mean, Elsworthy,” he said, with his loftiest air. “If Rosa does not return instantly, I shall be seriously offended. How you and your friends could be such utter idiots as to get up this ridiculous fiction, I can’t conceive; but the sooner it’s over the better. I expect to see her back tomorrow,” said the Curate, taking up his bag and looking with an absolute despotism, which exasperated the man, in Elsworthy’s face.</p>
			<p>“You may be sure, sir, if she knows as you want to see her, she’ll come,” said the worm which had been trampled on; “and them as asks me why, am I to say it was the clergyman’s orders?” said Elsworthy, looking up in his turn with a consciousness of power. “That means a deal, does that. I wouldn’t take it upon me to say as much, not of myself; but if them’s your orders, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It appears to me, Elsworthy,” said the Curate, who was inwardly in a towering passion, though outwardly calm enough, “either that you’ve been drinking or that you mean to be impertinent⁠—which is it?”</p>
			<p>“Me!⁠—drinking, sir?” cried the shopkeeper. “If I had been one as was given that way, I wouldn’t have attended to your interests not as I have done. There aint another man in Carlingford as has stood up for his clergyman as I have; and as for little Rosa, sir, most folks as had right notions would have inquired into that; but being as I trusted in you, I wasn’t the one to make any talk. I’ve said to everybody as has asked me that there wasn’t nothing in it but kindness. I don’t say as I hadn’t my own thoughts⁠—for gentlemen don’t go walking up Grange Lane with a pretty little creature like that all for nothing; but instead o’ making anything of that, or leading of you on, or putting it in the child’s head to give you encouragement, what was it I did but send her away afore you came home, that you mightn’t be led into temptation! And instead of feelin’ grateful, you say I’ve been drinking! It’s a thing as I scorn to answer,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy; “there aint no need to make any reply⁠—all Carlingford knows <em>me</em>; but as for Rosa, if it is understood plain between us that it’s your wish, I aint the man to interfere,” continued Rosa’s guardian, with a smile which drove the Curate frantic; “but she hasn’t got no father, poor thing, and it’s my business to look after her; and I’ll not bring her back, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, unless it’s understood between us plain.”</p>
			<p>Strong language, forcible, but unclerical, was on the Curate’s lips, and it was only with an effort that he restrained himself. “Look here, Elsworthy,” he said; “it will be better for you not to exasperate me. You understand perfectly what I mean. I repeat, Rosa must come back, and that instantly. It is quite unnecessary to explain to you why I insist upon this, for you comprehend it. Pshaw! don’t let us have any more of this absurdity,” he exclaimed, impatiently. “No more, I tell you. Your wife is not such a fool. Let anybody who inquires about me understand that I have come back, and am quite able to account for all my actions,” said the Curate, shouldering his bag. He was just about leaving the shop when Elsworthy rushed after him in an access of alarm and repentance.</p>
			<p>“One moment, sir,” cried the shopkeeper; “there aint no offence, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth? I am sure there aint nobody in Carlingford as means better, or would do as much for his clergyman. One moment, sir; there was one thing I forgot to mention. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse, sir, has been took bad. There was a message up a couple of hours ago to know when you was expected home. He’s had a stroke, and they don’t think as he’ll get over it⁠—being a man of a full ’abit of body,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Elsworthy in haste, lest the Curate should break in on his unfinished speech, “makes it dangerous. I’ve had my fears this long time past.”</p>
			<p>“A stroke,” said the Curate⁠—“a fit, do you mean? When, and how? and, good heavens! to think that you have been wasting my time with rubbish, and knew this!” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth tossed down his travelling-bag again, and wiped his forehead nervously. He had forgotten his real anxiety in the irritation of the moment. Now it returned upon him with double force. “How did it come on?” he asked, “and when?” and stood waiting for the answer, with a world of other questions, which he could not put to Elsworthy, hanging on his lips.</p>
			<p>“I have a deal of respect for that family, sir,” said Elsworthy; “they have had troubles as few folks in Carlingford know of. How close they have kep’ things, to be sure!⁠—but not so close as them that has good memories, and can put two and two together, couldn’t call to mind. My opinion, sir, if you believe me,” said the clerk of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s, approaching close to the Curate’s ear, “is, that it’s something concerning the son.”</p>
			<p>“The son!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with a troubled look. Then, after a pause, he added, as if his exclamation had been an oversight, “What son? has <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse a son?”</p>
			<p>“To think as they should have been so close with the clergyman!” said Elsworthy, innocently; “though he aint no credit that they should talk of him. He’s been gone out o’ Carlingford nigh upon twenty year; but he aint dead for all that; and I’m told as he’s been seen about Grange Lane this last spring. I am one as hears all the talk that’s a-going on, being, as you might say, in a public position of life. Such a thing mightn’t maybe come to your ears, sir?” he continued, looking inquisitively in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s face; “but wherever he is, you may be sure it’s something about him as has brought on this attack on the old man. It was last night as he was took so bad, and a couple of hours ago a message came up. Miss Wodehouse (as is the nicest lady in Grange Lane, and a great friend to me) had took a panic, and she was a-crying for you, the man said, and wouldn’t take no denial. If I had known where you was to be found, I’d have sent word.”</p>
			<p>“Send down my bag to my house,” said the Curate, hastily interrupting him. “Good night⁠—don’t forget what I said about the other matter.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth went out of the shop with a disagreeable impression that Elsworthy had been examining his face like an inquisitor, and was already forming conclusions from what he had seen there. He went away hurriedly, with a great many vague fears in his mind. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s sudden illness seemed to him a kind of repetition and echo of the Squire’s, and in the troubled and uncertain state of his thoughts, he got to confusing them together in the centre of this whirl of unknown disaster and perplexity. Perhaps even thus it was not all bitterness to the young man to feel his family united with that of Lucy Wodehouse. He went down Grange Lane in the summer darkness under the faint stars, full of anxiety and alarm, yet not without a thrill in his heart, a sweeter undercurrent of conscious agitation in the knowledge that he was hastening to her presence. Sudden breaks in his thoughts revealed her, as if behind a curtain, rising to receive him, giving him her hand, meeting his look with a smile; so that, on the whole, neither Gerald’s distress, nor Jack’s alarming call, nor his father’s attack, nor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s illness, nor the general atmosphere of vexation and trouble surrounding his way, could succeed in making the young man totally wretched. He had this little stronghold of his own to retire into. The world could not fall to pieces so long as he continued with eager steps to devour the road which led to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s garden-door.</p>
			<p>Before he had reached that goal, however, he met a group who were evidently returning from some little dinner in Grange Lane. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth took off his hat hastily in recognition of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, who was walking by her husband’s side, with a bright-coloured hood over her head instead of a bonnet. The Curate, who was a man of taste, could not help observing, even in the darkness, and amid all his preoccupations, how utterly the cherry-coloured trimmings of her headdress were out of accordance with the serious countenance of the Rector’s wife, who was a little heated with her walk. She was a good woman, but she was not fair to look upon; and it occurred to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth to wonder, if Lucy were to wait ten years for him, would the youthful grace dry and wither out of her like this! And then all at once another idea flashed upon his mind, without any wish of his. Like the unhappy lover in the ballad, he was suddenly aware of a temptation⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“How there looked him in the face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An angel beautiful and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how he knew it was a fiend.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Of course the Rectory will go to Frank.” He could not tell why at that moment the words rang into his ear with such a penetrating sound. That he hated himself for being able to think of such a possibility made no difference. It came darting and tingling into his mind like one of those suggestions of blasphemy which the devils whispered in Christian’s ear as he went through the Valley of the Shadow of Death. He went on faster than ever to escape from it, scarcely observing that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, instead of simply acknowledging his bow as she passed, stopped to shake hands, and to say how glad she was he had come back again. He thought of it afterwards with wonder and a strange gratitude. The Rector’s wife was not like the conventional type of a pitying angel; and even had she been so, he had not time to recognise her at that moment as he went struggling with his demons to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s green door.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
