<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan was in the garden watering her favourite ferns when her husband returned home to dinner on the day of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s death. The Rector was late, and she had already changed her dress, and was removing the withered leaves from her prettiest plant of maidenhair, and thinking, with some concern, of the fish, when she heard his step on the gravel; for the cook at the Rectory was rather hasty in her temper, and was apt to be provoking to her mistress next morning when the Rector chose to be late. It was a very hot day, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan was flushed and uncomfortable. To see his wife looking so cool and tranquil in her muslin dress rather aggravated him than otherwise, for she did not betray her anxiety about the trout, but welcomed him with a smile, as she felt it her duty to do, even when he was late for dinner. The Rector looked as if all the anxieties of the world were on his shoulders, as he came hurriedly along the gravel; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan’s curiosity was sufficiently excited by his looks to have overcome any consideration but that of the trout, which, however, was too serious to be trifled with; so, instead of asking questions, she thought it wiser simply to remind her husband that it was past six o’clock. “Dinner is waiting,” she said, in her composed way; and the Rector went up-stairs to wash his hands, half disposed to be angry with his wife. He found her already seated at the head of the table when he came down after his rapid ablutions; and though he was not particularly quick of perception, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan perceived, by the looks of the servant as well as the mistress, that he was generally disapproved of throughout the household for being half an hour too late. As for Thomas, he was at no pains to conceal his sentiments, but conducted himself with distant politeness towards his master, expressing the feelings of the household with all the greater freedom that he had been in possession of the Rectory since <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bury’s time, and felt himself more secure in his tenure than any incumbent, as was natural to a man who had already outlived two of these temporary tenants. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan was disposed to be conciliatory when he saw the strength of the opposite side.</p>
			<p>“I am a little late today,” said the politic Rector. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson was with me, and I did not want to bring him home to dinner. It was only on Wednesday he dined with us, and I know you don’t care for chance guests.”</p>
			<p>“I think it shows a great want of sense in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson to think of such a thing,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, responding by a little flush of anger to the unlucky Curate’s name. “He might understand that people like to be by themselves now and then. I am surprised that you give in to him so much as you do, William. Good-nature must stop somewhere, and I think it is always best to draw a line.”</p>
			<p>“I wish it were possible for everybody to draw a line,” said the Rector, mysteriously, with a sigh. “I have heard something that has grieved me very much to-day. I will tell you about it afterwards.” When he had said this, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan addressed himself sadly to his dinner, sighing over it, as if that had something to do with his distress.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps, ma’am,” suggested Thomas, who was scarcely on speaking terms with his master, “the Rector mayn’t have heard as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse has been took very bad again, and aint expected to see out the night.”</p>
			<p>“I am very sorry,” said the Rector. “Poor ladies! it will come very hard upon them. My dear, I think you should call and ask if you can do anything. Troubles never come singly, it is said. I am very sorry for that poor young creature; though, perhaps, things have not gone so far as one imagined.” The Rector sighed again, and looked as though his secret, whatever it might be, was almost too much for him. The consequence, of course, was, that Thomas prolonged his services to the last possibility, by way of hearing what had happened; as for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, she sat on thorns, though her sense of propriety was too great to permit her to hurry over the dinner. The pudding, though it was the Rector’s favourite pudding, prepared from a receipt only known at All-Souls, in which the late respected Head of that learned community had concentrated all his genius, was eaten in uneasy silence, broken only by the most transparent attempts on both sides to make a little conversation. Thomas hovered sternly over his master and mistress all the time, exacting with inexorable severity every usage of the table. He would not let them off the very smallest detail, but insisted on handing round the peaches, notwithstanding <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan’s protest. “They are the first out of the new orchard-house,” said the Rector’s wife. “I want your opinion of them. That will do, Thomas; we have got everything now, I think.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan was a little anxious about the peaches, having made a great many changes on her own responsibility in the gardening department; but the Rector took the downy fruit as if it had been a turnip, and notwithstanding her interest in the long-delayed news, his wife could not but find it very provoking that he took so little notice of her exertions.</p>
			<p>“Roberts stood out against the new flue as long as he could,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor took no interest in the garden, and everything had gone to ruin; though I must say it was very odd that anybody from <i>your</i> college, William, should be careless about such a vital matter,” said the Rector’s wife, with a little asperity. “I suppose there must be something in the air of Carlingford which makes people indifferent.” Naturally, it was very provoking, after all the trouble she had taken, to see her husband slicing that juicy pulp as if it had been any ordinary market fruit.</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon, my dear,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan; “I was thinking of this story about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. One is always making new discoveries of the corruption of human nature. He had behaved very badly to me; but it is very sad to see a young man sacrifice all his prospects for the indulgence of his passions; though that is a very secular way of looking at the subject,” said the Rector, shaking his head mournfully. “If it is bad in a worldly point of view, what is it in a spiritual? and in this age, too, when it is so important to keep up the character of the clergy!” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan sighed again more heavily than ever as he poured out the single glass of port, in which his wife joined him after dinner. “Such an occurrence throws a stigma upon the whole Church, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson very justly remarked.”</p>
			<p>“I thought <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson must have something to do with it,” said the Rector’s wife. “What has <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth been doing? When you keep a Low-Church Curate, you never can tell what he may say. If he had known of the All-Souls pudding he would have come to dinner, and we should have had it at first-hand,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, severely. She put away her peach in her resentment, and went to a side-table for her work, which she always kept handy for emergencies. Like her husband, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan had acquired some little “ways” in the long ten years of their engagement, one of which was a confirmed habit of needlework at all kinds of unnecessary moments, which much disturbed the Rector when he had anything particular to say.</p>
			<p>“My dear, I am very sorry to see you so much the victim of prejudice,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan. “I had hoped that all our long experiences⁠—” and here the Rector stopped short, troubled to see the rising colour in his wife’s face. “I don’t mean to blame you, my dear,” said the perplexed man; “I know you were always very patient;” and he paused, not knowing what more to say, comforting himself with the thought that women were incomprehensible creatures, as so many men have done before.</p>
			<p>“I am not patient,” said the Rector’s wife; “it never was my nature. I can’t help thinking sometimes that our long experiences have done us more harm than good; but I hope nothing will ever make me put up with a Curate who tells tales about other people, and flatters one’s self, and comes to dinner without being asked. Perhaps <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth is very sinful, but at least he is a gentleman,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan; and she bent her head over her work, and drove her needle so fast through the muslin she was at work upon, that it glimmered and sparkled like summer lightning before the spectator’s dazzled eyes.</p>
			<p>“I am sorry you are so prejudiced,” said the Rector. “It is a very unbecoming spirit, my dear, though I am grieved to say so much to you. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson is a very good young man, and he has nothing to do with this terrible story about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. I don’t wish to shock your feelings⁠—but there are a great many things in the world that one can’t explain to ladies. He has got himself into a most distressing position, and a public inquiry will be necessary. One can’t help seeing the hand of Providence in it,” said the Rector, playing reflectively with the peach on his plate.</p>
			<p>It was at this moment that Thomas appeared at the door to announce <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson, who had come to talk over the topic of the day with the Rector⁠—being comfortably obtuse in his perceptions, and quite disposed to ignore <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan’s general demeanour towards himself. “I am sure she has a bad temper,” he would say to his confidants in the parish; “you can see it by the redness in her face: but I never take any notice when she says rude things to me.” The redness was alarming in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan’s face as the unlucky man became visible at the door. She said audibly, “I knew we should be interrupted!” and got up from her chair. “As <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson is here, you will not want me, William,” she added, in her precisest tones. “If anything has happened since you came in, he will be able to tell you about it; and perhaps I had better send you your coffee here, for I have a great many things to do.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan gave a little groan in his spirit as his wife went away. To do him justice, he had a great deal of confidence in her, and was unconsciously guided by her judgment in many matters. Talking it over with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson was a totally different thing; for whatever might be said in his defence, there could not be any doubt that the Curate professed Low-Church principles, and had been known to drink tea with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beecher, the new minister of Salem Chapel. “Not that I object to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beecher because he is a Dissenter,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan said, “but because, my dear, you know, it is a totally different class of society.” When the Rector was left alone to discuss parish matters with this doubtful subordinate, instead of going into the subject with his wife, the good man felt a pang of disappointment; for though he professed to be reluctant to shock her, he had been longing all the time to enter into the story, which was certainly the most exciting which had occurred in Carlingford since the beginning of his incumbency. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, for her part, went up-stairs to the drawing-room with so much indignation about this personal grievance that she almost forgot her curiosity. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson hung like a cloud over all the advantages of Carlingford; he put out that new flue in the greenhouse, upon which she was rather disposed to pique herself, and withered her ferns, which everybody allowed to be the finest collection within a ten miles’ circuit. This sense of disgust increased upon her as she went into the drawing-room, where her eye naturally caught that carpet which had been the first cross of her married life. When she had laid down her work, she began to plan how the offensive bouquets might be covered with a pinafore of linen, which looked very cool and nice in summer-time. And then the Rector’s wife reflected that in winter a floor covered with white looked chilly, and that a woollen drugget of an appropriate small pattern would be better on the whole; but no such thing was to be had without going to London for it, which brought her mind back again to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson and all the disadvantages of Carlingford. These subjects occupied <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan to the exclusion of external matters, as was natural; and when she heard the gentlemen stir down-stairs as if with ideas of joining her in the drawing-room, the Rector’s wife suddenly recollected that she had promised some tea to a poor woman in Grove Street, and that she could not do better this beautiful evening than take it in her own person. She was very active in her district at all times, and had proved herself an admirable clergywoman; but perhaps it would not have occurred to her to go out upon a charitable errand that particular evening had it not been for the presence of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leeson down-stairs.</p>
			<p>It was such a very lovely night, that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan was tempted to go further than she intended. She called on two or three of her favourites in Grove Street, and was almost as friendly with them as Lucy Wodehouse was with the people in Prickett’s Lane; but being neither pretty and young, like Lucy, nor yet a mother with a nursery, qualified to talk about the measles, her reception was not quite as enthusiastic as it might have been. Somehow it would appear as though our poor neighbours loved most the ministrations of youth, which is superior to all ranks in the matter of possibility and expectation, and inferior to all ranks in the matter of experience; and so holds a kind of balance and poise of nature between the small and the great. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan was vaguely sensible of her disadvantages in this respect as well as in others. She never could help imagining what she might have been had she married ten years before at the natural period. “And even then not a girl,” she said to herself in her sensible way, as she carried this habitual thread of thought with her along the street, past the little front gardens, where there were so many mothers with their children. On the other side of the way the genteel houses frowned darkly with their staircase windows upon the humility of Grove Street; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan began to think within herself of the Miss Hemmings and other spinsters, and how they got along upon this path of life, which, after all, is never lightsome to behold, except in the future or the past. It was dead present with the Rector’s wife just then, and many speculations were in her mind, as was natural. “Not that I could not have lived unmarried,” she continued within herself, with a woman’s pride; “but things looked so different at five-and-twenty!” and in her heart she grudged the cares she had lost, and sighed over this wasting of her years.</p>
			<p>It was just then that the youngest Miss Hemmings saw <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, and crossed over to speak to her. Miss Hemmings had left five-and-thirty behind a long time ago, and thought the Rector’s wife a happy woman in the bloom of youth. When she had discovered conclusively that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan would not go in to have a cup of tea, Miss Hemmings volunteered to walk with her to the corner; and it is not necessary to say that she immediately plunged into the topic which at that moment engaged all minds in Carlingford. “If I had not seen it with my own eyes, I should not have believed it,” said Miss Hemmings. “I should have thought it a got-up story; not that I ever could have thought it <i>impossible</i>, as you say⁠—for, alas! I know well that without grace every wickedness is more than possible⁠—but I saw them with my own eyes, my dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan; she standing outside, the bold little thing, and he at the door⁠—as if it was right for a clergyman to open the door like a man-servant⁠—and from that moment to this she has not been seen by any living creature in Carlingford: who can tell what may have been done with her?” cried the horrified eyewitness. “She has never been seen from that hour!”</p>
			<p>“But that was only twenty-four hours ago,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan; “she may have gone off to visit some of her friends.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, my dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, twenty-four hours is a long time for a girl to disappear out of her own home,” said Miss Hemmings; “and all her friends have been sent to, and no word can be heard of her. I am afraid it will go very hard with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth; and I am sure it looks like a judgment upon him for all his candlesticks and flowers and things,” she continued, out of breath with the impetuosity of her tale.</p>
			<p>“Do you think, then, that God makes people sin in order to punish them?” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, with some fire, which shocked Miss Hemmings, who did not quite know how to reply.</p>
			<p>“I do so wish you would come in for a few minutes and taste our tea; my sister Sophia was just making it when I came out. We get it from our brother in Assam, and we think a great deal of it,” said Miss Hemmings; “it can’t possibly be adulterated, you know, for it comes direct from his plantation. If you can’t come in just now, I will send you some to the Rectory, and you shall tell us how you like it. We are quite proud of our tea. My brother has a large plantation, and he hopes⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Thank you,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, “but the Rector will be waiting for me, and I must go. It must be very nice to have your tea direct from the plantation; and I hope you will change your mind about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth,” she continued, without much regard for punctuation, as she shook hands at the corner. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan went down a narrow street which led to Grange Lane, after this interview, with some commotion in her mind. She took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s part instinctively, without asking any proofs of his innocence. The sun was just setting, and <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s stood out dark and picturesque against all the glory of the western sky as the Rector’s wife went past. She could not help thinking of him, in his youth and the opening of his career, with a kind of wistful interest. If he had married Lucy Wodehouse, and confined himself to his own district (but then he had no district), <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan would have contemplated the two, not, indeed, without a certain half-resentful self-reference and contrast, but with natural sympathy. And now, to think of this dark and ugly blot on his fair beginning disturbed her much. When <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan recollected that she had left her husband and his Curate consulting over this matter, she grew very hot and angry, and felt humiliated by the thought. Was it her William, her hero, whom she had magnified for all these ten years, though not without occasional twinges of enlightenment, into something great, who was thus sitting upon his young brother with so little human feeling and so much middle-aged jealousy? It hurt her to think of it, though not for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s sake. Poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, though not at all a sentimental person, had hoarded up her ideal so much after the ordinary date, that it came all the harder upon her when everything thus merged into the light of common day. She walked very fast up Grange Lane, which was another habit of her maidenhood not quite in accord with the habit of sauntering acquired during the same period by the Fellow of All-Souls. When <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan was opposite <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s, she looked across with some interest, thinking of Lucy; and it shocked her greatly to see the closed shutters, which told of the presence of death. Then, a little farther up, she could see Elsworthy in front of his shop, which was already closed, talking vehemently to a little group round the door. The Rector’s wife crossed the street, to avoid coming into contact with this excited party; and, as she went swiftly along under the garden-walls, came direct, without perceiving it, upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, who was going the opposite way. They were both absorbed in their own thoughts, the Perpetual Curate only perceiving <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan in time to take off his hat to her as he passed; and, to tell the truth, having no desire for any further intercourse. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, however, was of a different mind. She stopped instantly, as soon as she perceived him. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, it is getting late⁠—will you walk with me as far as the Rectory?” she said, to the Curate’s great astonishment. He could not help looking at her with curiosity as he turned to accompany her. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan was still wearing her wedding things, which were not now in their first freshness⁠—not to say that the redness, of which she was so painfully sensible, was rather out of accordance with the orange blossoms. Then she was rather flurried and disturbed in her mind; and, on the whole, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth ungratefully concluded the Rector’s wife to be looking her plainest, as he turned with very languid interest to see her safely home.</p>
			<p>“A great many things seem to be happening just now,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, with a good deal of embarrassment; “I suppose the people in Carlingford are grateful to anybody who gives them something to talk about.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know about the gratitude,” said the Perpetual Curate; “it is a sentiment I don’t believe in.”</p>
			<p>“You ought to believe in everything as long as you are young,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan. “I want very much to speak to you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth; but then I don’t know how you will receive what I am going to say.”</p>
			<p>“I can’t tell until I know what it is,” said the Curate, shutting himself up. He had an expressive face generally, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan saw the shutters put up, and the jealous blinds drawn over the young man’s countenance as clearly as if they had been tangible articles. He did not look at her, but kept swinging his cane in his hand, and regarding the pavement with downcast eyes; and if the Rector’s wife had formed any expectations of finding in the Perpetual Curate an ingenuous young heart, open to sympathy and criticism, she now discovered her mistake.</p>
			<p>“If I run the risk, perhaps you will forgive me,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan. “I have just been hearing a dreadful story about you; and I don’t believe it in the least, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth,” she continued, with a little effusion; for though she was very sensible, she was only a woman, and did not realise the possibility of having her sympathy rejected, and her favourable judgment received with indifference.</p>
			<p>“I am much flattered by your good opinion. What was the dreadful story?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, looking at her with careless eyes. They were just opposite Elsworthy’s shop, and could almost hear what he was saying, as he stood in the midst of his little group of listeners, talking loud and vehemently. The Perpetual Curate looked calmly at him across the road, and turned again to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, repeating his question, “What was the dreadful story?⁠—one gets used to romances,” he said, with a composure too elaborate to be real; but <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan did not think of that.</p>
			<p>“If you don’t care about it, I need not say anything,” said the Rector’s wife, who could not help feeling affronted. “But I am so sorry that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan and you don’t get on,” she continued, after a little pause. “I have no right to speak; but I take an interest in everything that belongs to the parish. If you would put a little confidence in my husband, things might go on better; but, in the mean time, I thought I might say to you, on my own account, that I had heard this scandal, and that I don’t believe in it. If you do not understand my motive I can’t help it,” said the Rector’s wife, who was now equally ready for friendship or for battle.</p>
			<p>“Thanks; I understand what you mean,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, who had come to himself. “But will you tell me what it is you don’t believe in?” he asked, with a smile which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan did not quite comprehend.</p>
			<p>“I will tell you,” she said, with a little quiet exasperation. “I don’t think you would risk your prospects, and get yourself into trouble, and damage your entire life, for the sake of any girl, however pretty she might be. Men don’t do such things for women nowadays, even when it is a worthy object,” said the disappointed optimist. “And I believe you are a great deal more sensible, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth.” There was just that tone of mingled approval and contempt in this speech which a woman knows how to deliver herself of without any appearance of feeling; and which no young man, however <i>blasé</i>, can hear with composure.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps not,” he said, with a little heat and a rising colour. “I am glad you think me so sensible.” And then there ensued a pause, upon the issue of which depended the question of peace or war between these two. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s good angel, perhaps, dropped softly through the dusky air at that moment, and jogged his perverse charge with the tip of a celestial wing. “And yet there might be women in the world for whom⁠—” said the Curate; and stopped again. “I daresay you are not anxious to know my sentiments on the subject,” he continued, with a little laugh. “I am sorry you think so badly⁠—I mean so well of me.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think badly of you,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan, hastily. “Thank you for walking with me; and whatever happens, remember that I for one don’t believe a word of it,” she said, holding out her hand. After this little declaration of friendship, the Rector’s wife returned to the Rectory, where her husband was waiting for her, more than ever prepared to stand up for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. She went back to the drawing-room, forgetting all about the carpet, and poured out the tea with satisfaction, and made herself very agreeable to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Finial, the architect, who had come to talk over the restorations. In that moment of stimulation she forgot all her experience of her husband’s puzzled looks, of the half-comprehension with which he looked at her, and the depths of stubborn determination which were far beyond the reach of her hastier and more generous spirit, and so went on with more satisfaction and gaiety than she had felt possible for a long time, beating her drums and blowing her trumpets, to the encounter in which her female forces were so confident of victory.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
