<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-34" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</h2>
			<p>When the door closed upon Lucy and her sister, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth stood by himself, facing the other people assembled. The majority of them were more surprised, more shocked, than he was; but they were huddled together in their wonder at the opposite end of the table, and had somehow a confused, half-conscious air of being on the other side.</p>
			<p>“It’s a very extraordinary revelation that has just been made to us,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks. “I am throwing no doubt upon it, for my part; but my conviction was, that Tom Wodehouse died in the West Indies. He was just the kind of man to die in the West Indies. If it’s you,” said the Doctor, with a growl of natural indignation, “you have the constitution of an elephant. You should have been dead ten years ago, at the very least; and it appears to me there would be some difficulty in proving identity, if anybody would take up that view of the question.” As he spoke, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks walked round the newcomer, looking at him with medical criticism. The Doctor’s eyes shot out fiery hazel gleams as he contemplated the heavy figure. “More appearance than reality,” he muttered to himself, with a kind of grim satisfaction, poising a forefinger in air, as if to prove the unwholesome flesh; and then he went round to the other elbow of the unexpected heir. “The thing is now, what you mean to do for them, to repair your father’s neglect,” he said, tapping peremptorily on Wodehouse’s arm.</p>
			<p>“There is something else to be said in the meantime,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. “I must know precisely how it is that a state of affairs so different from anything <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse could have intended has come about. The mere absence of a will does not seem to me to explain it. I should like to have <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brown’s advice⁠—for my own satisfaction, if nothing else.”</p>
			<p>“The parson has got nothing to do with it, that I can see,” said Wodehouse, “unless he was looking for a legacy, or that sort of thing. As for the girls, I don’t see what right I have to be troubled; they took deuced little trouble with me. Perhaps they’d have taken me in as a sort of footman without pay⁠—you heard what they said, Waters? By Jove! I’ll serve Miss Mary out for that,” said the vagabond. Then he paused a little, and, looking round him, moderated his tone. “I’ve been badly used all my life,” said the prodigal son. “They would never give me a hearing. They say I did heaps of things I never dreamt of. Mary aint above thinking of her own interest⁠—”</p>
			<p>Here <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor came forward from the middle of the room where he had been standing in a perplexed manner since the ladies went away. “Hold⁠—hold your tongue, sir!” said the late Rector; “haven’t you done enough injury already⁠—” When he had said so much, he stopped as abruptly as he had begun, and seemed to recollect all at once that he had no title to interfere.</p>
			<p>“By Jove!” said Wodehouse, “you don’t seem to think I know what belongs to me, or who belongs to me. Hold <em>your</em> tongue, Waters; I can speak for myself. I’ve been long enough snubbed by everybody that had a mind. I don’t mean to put up with this sort of thing any longer. Any man who pleases can consult John Brown. I recollect John Brown as well as anybody in Carlingford. It don’t matter to me what he says, or what anybody says. The girls are a parcel of girls, and I am my father’s son, as it happens. I should have thought the parson had enough on his hands for one while,” said the new heir, in the insolence of triumph. “He tried patronising me, but that wouldn’t answer. Why, there’s his brother, Jack Wentworth, his elder brother, come down here purposely to manage matters for me. He’s the eldest son, by Jove! and one of the greatest swells going. He has come down here on purpose to do the friendly thing by me. We’re great friends, by Jove! Jack Wentworth and I; and yet here’s a beggarly younger brother, that hasn’t a penny⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Wodehouse,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with some contempt, “sit down and be quiet. You and I have some things to talk of which had better not be discussed in public. Leave Jack Wentworth’s name alone, if you are wise, and don’t imagine that I am going to bear your punishment. Be silent, sir!” cried the Curate, sternly; “do you suppose I ask any explanations from you? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters, I want to hear how this has come about? When I saw you in this man’s interest some time ago, you were not so friendly to him. Tell me how it happens that he is now your client, and that you set him forth as the heir!”</p>
			<p>“By Jove, the parson has nothing to do with it! Let him find it out,” muttered Wodehouse in his beard; but the words were only half audible, and the vagabond’s shabby soul was cowed in spite of himself. He gave the lawyer a furtive thrust in the arm as he spoke, and looked at him a little anxiously; for the position of a man standing lawfully on his natural rights was new to Wodehouse; and all his certainty of the facts did not save him from a sensation of habit which suggested that close examination was alarming, and that something might still be found out. As for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters, he looked with placid contempt at the man, who was not respectable, and still had the instincts of a vagabond in his heart.</p>
			<p>“I am perfectly ready to explain,” said the irreproachable solicitor, who was quite secure in his position. “The tone of the request, however, might be modified a little; and as I don’t, any more than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse, see exactly what right <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth has to demand⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I ask an explanation, not on my own behalf, but for the Miss Wodehouses, who have made me their deputy,” said the Curate, “for their satisfaction, and that I may consult <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brown. You seem to forget that all <em>he</em> gains they lose; which surely justifies their representative in asking how did it come about?”</p>
			<p>It was at this point that all the other gentlemen present pressed closer, and evinced an intention to take part. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks was the first to speak. He took a pinch of snuff, and while he consumed it looked from under his grizzled sandy eyebrows with a perplexing mixture of doubt and respect at the Perpetual Curate. He was a man of some discrimination in his way, and the young man’s lofty looks impressed him a little in spite of himself.</p>
			<p>“Not to interrupt the explanation,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks, “which we’ll all be glad to hear⁠—but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s a young man, not possessed, so far as I am aware, of any particular right;⁠—except that he has been very generous and prompt in offering his services,” said the Doctor, moved to the admission by a fiery glance from the Curate’s eye, which somehow did not look like the eye of a guilty man. “I was thinking, an old man, and an old friend, like myself, might maybe be a better guardian for the ladies’ interests⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor, who had been listening very anxiously, was seized with a cough at this moment, which drowned out the Doctor’s words. It was a preparatory cough, and out of it the late Rector rushed into speech. “I have come from⁠—from Oxford to be of use,” said the new champion. “My time is entirely at my own⁠—at Miss Wodehouse’s⁠—at the Miss Wodehouses’ disposal. I am most desirous to be of use,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor, anxiously. And he advanced close to the table to prefer his claim.</p>
			<p>“Such a discussion seems quite unnecessary,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with some haughtiness. “I shall certainly do in the meantime what has been entrusted to me. At present we are simply losing time.”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—” said the Rector. The word was not of importance nor uttered with much resolution, but it arrested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth more surely than the shout of a multitude. He turned sharp round upon his adversary, and said “Well?” with an air of exasperation; while Wodehouse, who had been lounging about the room in a discomfited condition, drew near to listen.</p>
			<p>“I am comparatively a stranger to the Miss Wodehouses,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan; “still I am their clergyman; and I think with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks, that a young man like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, especially a man so seriously compromised⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, stop! I do think you are all a great deal too hard upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth,” said the lawyer, with a laugh of toleration, which Wodehouse echoed behind him with a sense of temerity that made his laughter all the louder. He was frightened, but he was glad to make himself offensive, according to his nature. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth stood alone, for his part, and had to put up with the laugh as he best could.</p>
			<p>“If anyone here wishes to injure me with the Miss Wodehouses, an opportunity may easily be found,” said the Curate, with as much composure as he could muster; “and I am ready to relinquish my charge when they call on me to do so. In the meantime, this is not the place to investigate my conduct. Sit down, sir, and let us be free of your interference for this moment at least,” he said, fiercely, turning to the new heir. “I warn you again, you have nothing but justice to expect at my hands. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters, we wait your explanations.” He was the tallest man in the room, which perhaps had something to do with it; the youngest, best born, and best endowed. That he would have carried the day triumphantly in the opinion of any popular audience, there could be no kind of doubt. Even in this middle-aged unimpressionable assembly, his indignant self-control had a certain influence. When he drew a chair towards the table and seated himself, the others sat down unawares, and the lawyer began his story without any further interruption. The explanation of all was, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse, like so many men, had an ambition to end his days as a country gentleman. He had set his heart for years on an estate in the neighbourhood of Carlingford, and had just completed his long-contemplated purchase at the moment of his last seizure. Nobody knew, except the Curate and the lawyer, what the cause of that seizure was. They exchanged looks without being aware of it, and Wodehouse, still more deeply conscious, uttered, poor wretch! a kind of gasp, which sounded like a laugh to the other horrified spectators. After all, it was his crime which had brought him his good fortune, for there had been an early will relating to property which existed no longer⁠—property which had been altogether absorbed in the newly-acquired estate. “I have no doubt my late excellent partner would have made a settlement had the time been permitted him,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters. “I have not the slightest doubt as to his intentions; but the end was very unexpected at the last. I suppose death always is unexpected when it comes,” said the lawyer, with a little solemnity, recollecting that three of his auditors were clergymen. “The result is painful in many respects; but law is law, and such accidents cannot be entirely avoided. With the exception of a few trifling personal matters, and the furniture, and a little money at the bank, there is nothing but freehold property, and of course the son takes that. I can have no possible objection to your consulting <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brown; but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brown can give you no further information.” If there had been any little hope of possible redress lingering in the mind of the perplexed assembly, this brought it to a conclusion. The heir, who had been keeping behind with an impulse of natural shame, came back to the table when his rights were so clearly established. He did not know how to behave himself with a good grace, but he was disposed to be conciliatory, as far as he could, especially as it began to be disagreeably apparent that the possession of his father’s property might not make any particular difference in the world’s opinion of himself.</p>
			<p>“It aint my fault, gentlemen,” said Wodehouse. “Of course, I expected the governor to take care of the girls. I’ve been kept out of it for twenty years, and that’s a long time. By Jove! I’ve never known what it was to be a rich man’s son since I was a lad. I don’t say I won’t do something for the girls if they behave to me as they ought; and as for you, gentlemen, who were friends of the family, I’ll always be glad to see you in my house,” he said, with an attempt at a friendly smile. But nobody took any notice of the overtures of the new heir.</p>
			<p>“Then they have nothing to depend upon,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor, whose agitated looks were the most inexplicable feature of the whole⁠—“no shelter even; no near relations I ever heard of⁠—and nobody to take care of Lucy if⁠—” Here he stopped short and went to the window, and stood looking out in a state of great bewilderment. The late Rector was so buried in his own thoughts, whatever they might be, that he did not pay any attention to the further conversation which went on behind him⁠—of which, however, there was very little⁠—and only came to himself when he saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth go rapidly through the garden. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor rushed after the Perpetual Curate. He might be seriously compromised, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Morgan said; but he was more sympathetic than anybody else in Carlingford under present circumstances; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor, in his middle-aged uncertainty, could not help having a certain confidence in the young man’s promptitude and vigour. He made up to him out of breath when he was just entering George Street. Carlingford had paid what respect it could to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s memory; and now the shutters were being taken off the shopwindows, and people in general were very willing to reward themselves for their self-denial by taking what amusement they could out of the reports which already began to be circulated about the way in which the Miss Wodehouses were “left.” When the late Rector came up with the Perpetual Curate opposite Masters’s shop there was quite a group of people there who noted the conjunction. What could it mean? Was there going to be a compromise? Was Carlingford to be shamefully cheated out of the “investigation,” and all the details about Rosa Elsworthy, for which it hungered? <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor put his arm through that of the Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s, and permitted himself to be swept along by the greater impetus of the young man’s rapid steps, for at this moment, being occupied with more important matters, the late Rector had altogether forgotten <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s peculiar position, and the cloud that hung over him.</p>
			<p>“What a very extraordinary thing!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor. “What could have betrayed old Wodehouse into such a blunder! He must have known well enough. This son⁠—this fellow⁠—has been living all the time, of course. It is quite inexplicable to me,” said the aggrieved man. “Do you know if there are any aunts or uncles⁠—any people whom poor little Lucy might live with, for instance, if⁠—” And here <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor once more came to a dead stop. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, for his part, was so far from thinking of her as “poor little Lucy,” that he was much offended by the unnecessary commiseration.</p>
			<p>“The sisters will naturally remain together,” he said; “and, of course, there are many people who would be but too glad to receive them. Miss Wodehouse is old enough to protect her sister⁠—though, of course, the balance of character is on the other side,” said the inconsiderate young man; at which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor winced, but made no definite reply.</p>
			<p>“So you think there are people she could go to?” said the late Rector, after a pause. “The thing altogether is so unexpected, you know. My idea was⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon,” said the Curate; “I must see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brown, and this is about the best time to find him at home. Circumstances make it rather awkward for me to call at the Rectory just now,” he continued, with a smile⁠—“circumstances over which I have no control, as people say; but perhaps you will stay long enough to see me put on my trial. Goodbye now.”</p>
			<p>“Stop a moment,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor; “about this trial. Don’t be affronted⁠—I have nothing to do with it, you know; and Morgan means very well, though he’s stupid enough. I should like to stand your friend, Wentworth; you know I would. I wish you’d yield to tell me all about it. If I were to call on you tonight after dinner⁠—for perhaps it would put <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin out to give me a chop?”</p>
			<p>The Curate laughed in spite of himself. “Fellows of All Souls don’t dine on chops,” he said, unable to repress a gleam of amusement; “but come at six, and you shall have something to eat, as good as I can give you. As for telling you all about it,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, “all the world is welcome to know as much as I know.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor laid his hand on the young man’s arm, by way of soothing him. “We’ll talk it all over,” he said, confidentially; “both this affair, and⁠—and the other. We have a good deal in common, if I am not much mistaken, and I trust we shall always be good friends,” said the inexplicable man. His complexion heightened considerably after he had made this speech, which conveyed nothing but amazement to the mind of the Curate; and then he shook hands hastily, and hurried back again towards Grange Lane. If there had been either room or leisure in Frank Wentworth’s mind for other thoughts, he might have laughed or puzzled over the palpable mystery; but as it was, he had dismissed the late Rector entirely from his mind before he reached the door of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brown’s room, where the lawyer was seated alone. John Brown, who was altogether a different type of man from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Waters, held out his hand to his visitor, and did not look at all surprised to see him. “I have expected a call from you,” he said, “now that your old friend is gone, from whom you would naturally have sought advice in the circumstances. Tell me what I can do for you;” and it became apparent to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth that it was his own affairs which were supposed to be the cause of his application. It may be supposed after this that the Curate stated his real object very curtly and clearly without any unnecessary words, to the unbounded amazement of the lawyer, who, being a busy man, and not a friend of the Wodehouses, had as yet heard nothing of the matter. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brown, however, could only confirm what had been already said. “If it is really freehold property, and no settlement made, there cannot be any question about it,” he said; “but I will see Waters tomorrow and make all sure, if you wish it; though he dares not mislead you on such a point. I am very sorry for the ladies, but I don’t see what can be done for them,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brown; “and about yourself, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth?” Perhaps it was because of a certain look of genuine confidence and solicitude in John Brown’s honest face that the Curate’s heart was moved. For the first time he condescended to discuss the matter⁠—to tell the lawyer, with whom indeed he had but a very slight acquaintance (for John Brown lived at the other end of Carlingford, and could not be said to be in society), all he knew about Rosa Elsworthy, and something of his suspicions. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brown, for his part, knew little of the Perpetual Curate in his social capacity, but he knew about Wharfside, which was more to the purpose; and having himself been truly in love once in his life, commonplace as he looked, this honest man did not believe it possible that Lucy Wodehouse’s representative could be Rosa Elsworthy’s seducer⁠—the two things looked incompatible to the straightforward vision of John Brown.</p>
			<p>“I’ll attend at their investigation,” he said, with a smile, “which, if you were not particularly interested, you’d find not bad fun, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. These private attempts at law are generally very amusing. I’ll attend and look after your interests; but you had better see that this Tom Wodehouse⁠—I remember the scamp⁠—he used to be bad enough for anything⁠—don’t give you the slip and get out of the way. Find out if you can where he has been living these two days. I’ll attend to the other matter, too,” the lawyer said, cheerfully, shaking hands with his new client; and the Curate went away with a vague feeling that matters were about to come right somehow, at which he smiled when he came to think of it, and saw how little foundation he had for such a hope. But his hands were full of business, and he had no time to consider his own affairs at this particular moment. It seemed to him a kind of profanity to permit Lucy to remain under the same roof with Wodehouse, even though he was her brother; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Proctor’s inquiries had stimulated his own feeling. There was a certain pleasure, besides, in postponing himself and his own business, however important, to her and her concerns; and it was with this idea that he proceeded to the house of his aunts, and was conducted to a little private sitting-room appropriated to the sole use of Miss Leonora, for whom he had asked. As he passed the door of the drawing-room, which was ajar, he glanced in, and saw his aunt Dora bending over somebody who wept, and heard a familiar voice pouring out complaints, the general sound of which was equally familiar, though he could not make out a word of the special subject. Frank was startled, notwithstanding his preoccupations, for it was the same voice which had summoned him to Wentworth Rectory which now poured out its lamentations in the Miss Wentworths’ drawing-room in Carlingford. Evidently some new complication had arisen in the affairs of the family. Miss Leonora was in her room, busy with the books of a Ladies’ Association, of which she was treasurer. She had a letter before her from the missionary employed by the society, which was a very interesting letter, and likely to make a considerable sensation when read before the next meeting. Miss Leonora was taking the cream off this piece of correspondence, enjoying at once itself and the impression it would make. She was slightly annoyed when her nephew came in to disturb her. “The others are in the drawing-room, as usual,” she said. “I can’t imagine what Lewis could be thinking of, to bring you here. Louisa’s coming can make no difference to you.”</p>
			<p>“So Louisa has come? I thought I heard her voice. What has happened to bring Louisa here?” said the Curate, who was not sorry to begin with an indifferent subject. Miss Leonora shook her head and took up her letter.</p>
			<p>“She is in the drawing-room,” said the strong-minded aunt. “If you have no particular business with me, Frank, you had better ask herself: of course, if you want me, I am at your service⁠—but otherwise I am busy, you see.”</p>
			<p>“And so am I,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, “as busy as a man can be whose character is at stake. Do you know I am to be tried tomorrow? But that is not what I came to ask you about.”</p>
			<p>“I wish you would <em>tell</em> me about it,” said Miss Leonora. She got up from her writing-table and from the missionary’s letter, and abandoned herself to the impulses of nature. “I have heard disagreeable rumours. I don’t object to your reserve, Frank, but things seem to be getting serious. What does it mean?”</p>
			<p>The Curate had been much braced in his inner man by his short interview with John Brown; that, and the representative position he held, had made a wonderful change in his feelings: besides, a matter which was about to become so public could not be ignored. “It means only that a good many people in Carlingford think me a villain,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth: “it is not a flattering idea; and it seems to me, I must say, an illogical induction from the facts of my life. Still it is true that some people think so⁠—and I am to be tried tomorrow. But in the meantime, something else has happened. I know you are a good woman, aunt Leonora. We don’t agree in many things, but that does not matter. There are two ladies in Carlingford who up to this day have been rich, well off, well cared for, and who have suddenly lost all their means, their protector, even their home. They have no relations that I know of. One of them is good for any exertion that may be necessary,” said the Curate, his voice softening with a far-off masculine suggestion as of tears; “but she is young⁠—too young to contend with the world⁠—and she is now suffering her first grief. The other is old enough, but not good for much⁠—”</p>
			<p>“You mean the two Miss Wodehouses?” said Miss Leonora. “Their father has turned out to be⁠—bankrupt?⁠—or something?⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Worse than bankrupt,” said the Curate: “there is a brother who takes everything. Will you stand by them⁠—offer them shelter?⁠—I mean for a time. I don’t know anybody I should care to apply to but you.”</p>
			<p>Miss Leonora paused and looked at her nephew. “First tell me what you have to do with them,” she asked. “If there is a brother, he is their natural protector⁠—certainly not you⁠—unless there is something I don’t know of. Frank, you know you can’t marry,” said Miss Leonora, with a little vehemence, once more looking in her nephew’s face.</p>
			<p>“No,” said Frank, with momentary bitterness; “I am not likely to make any mistake about that⁠—at present, at least. The brother is a reprobate of whom they know nothing. I have no right to consider myself their protector⁠—but I am their friend at least,” said the Curate, breaking off with again that softening in his voice. “They may have a great many friends, for anything I know; but I have confidence in you, aunt Leonora: you are not perhaps particularly sympathetic,” he went on, with a laugh; “you don’t condole with Louisa, for instance; but I could trust you with⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Lucy Wodehouse!” said Miss Leonora; “I don’t dislike her at all, if she would not wear that ridiculous grey cloak; but young men don’t take such an interest in young women without some reason for it. What are we to do for you, Frank?” said the strong-minded woman, looking at him with a little softness. Miss Leonora, perhaps, was not used to be taken into anybody’s confidence. It moved her more than might have been expected from so self-possessed a woman. Perhaps no other act on the part of her nephew could have had so much effect, had he been able to pursue his advantage, upon the still undecided fate of Skelmersdale.</p>
			<p>“Nothing,” said the Curate. He met her eye very steadily, but she was too clear-sighted to believe that he felt as calmly as he looked. “Nothing,” he repeated again⁠—“I told you as much before. I have been slandered here, and here I must remain. There are no parsonages or paradises for me.”</p>
			<p>With which speech <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth shook hands with his aunt and went away. He left Miss Leonora as he had left her on various occasions⁠—considerably confused in her ideas. She could not enjoy any longer the cream of the missionary’s letter. When she tried to resume her reading, her attention flagged over it. After a while she put on her bonnet and went out, after a little consultation with her maid, who assisted her in the housekeeping department. The house was tolerably full at the present moment, but it was elastic. She was met at the green door of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s garden by the new proprietor, who stared excessively, and did not know what to make of such an apparition. “Jack Wentworth’s aunt, by Jove!” he said to himself, and took off his hat, meaning to show her “a little civility.” Miss Leonora thought him one of the attendants at the recent ceremonial, and passed him without any ceremony. She was quite intent upon her charitable mission. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s confidence was justified.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
