<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
			<p>“If they are going to stay in Carlingford, perhaps we could be of use to them? Yes, Lucy; and I am sure anything we could do for Mr. Wentworth⁠—” said Miss Wodehouse. “I wonder what house they will get. I am going to Elsworthy’s about some paper, and we can ask him if he knows where they are going. That poor little Rosa should have some one to take care of her. I often wonder whether it would be kind to speak to Mrs. Elsworthy about it, Lucy; she is a sensible woman. The little thing stands at the door in the evening, and talks to people who are passing, and I am afraid there are some people who are unprincipled, and tell her she is pretty, and say things to her,” said Miss Wodehouse, shaking her head; “it is a great pity. Even Mr. Wentworth is a great deal more civil to that little thing than he would be if she had not such a pretty face.”</p>
			<p>“I said you knew everything that went on in Carlingford,” said Lucy, as they went out together from the green door, not in their grey cloaks this time; “but I forgot to ask you about one thing that puzzled us last night⁠—who is the man in the beard who lives at Mrs. Hadwin’s? Mr. Wentworth will not tell anybody about him, and I think he knows.”</p>
			<p>“Who is the man in the beard?” said Miss Wodehouse, with a gasp. She grew very pale, and turned away her head and shivered visibly. “How very cold it is!” she said, with her teeth chattering; “did you think it was so cold? I⁠—I don’t know any men with beards; and it is so strange of you to say I know everything that goes on in Carlingford. Don’t stop to speak to that little girl just now. Did you say she came from Prickett’s Lane? No. 10? It is very right to go to see the sick, but, indeed, I don’t approve of your attendance upon that poor woman, Lucy. When I was a girl I dared not have gone away by myself as you do, and she might not be a proper person. There is a carriage that I don’t know standing before Elsworthy’s shop.”</p>
			<p>“But you have not told me yet about the man with the beard,” said Lucy, whose curiosity was excited. She looked at her sister keenly with an investigating look, and poor Miss Wodehouse was fain to draw her shawl close round her, and complain again of the cold.</p>
			<p>“I told you I did not know,” she said, with a complaining tone in her voice. “It is strange you should think I knew; it looks as if you thought me a gossip, Lucy. I wonder who those people can be coming out of the carriage? My dear,” said the elder sister, feeling within herself that an attack upon the enemy’s country was the best means of meeting any sally⁠—“I don’t think you should go down to Prickett’s Lane just now. I saw Mr. Wentworth pass a little while ago, and people might say you went to meet each other. I can’t keep people from talking, Lucy, and you are both so young; and you know I spoke to you before about your meeting so often. It will be a great deal better for you to come with me to call on his aunts.”</p>
			<p>“Only that my poor patient wants me,” said Lucy. “Must I not do my duty to a poor woman who is dying, because Mr. Wentworth is in Prickett’s Lane? There is no reason why I should be afraid of meeting Mr. Wentworth,” said the young district-visitor, severely; and the elder sister saw that Lucy spoke in a different tone from that in which she had answered her before. She did not extinguish Miss Wodehouse by a reference to the great work. She treated the matter more as a personal one to-day; and a shadow⁠—a very ghost of irritation⁠—was in Lucy’s voice. The two crossed the street silently after that to Elsworthy’s, where a group of ladies were visible, who had come out of the strange carriage. One of them was seated in a chair by the counter, another was reading a list which Mr. Elsworthy had just presented to her, and the third, who was not so tall as her sister, was pressing up to it on tiptoe, trying to read it too. “That is Miss Dora Wentworth,” said Lucy, “and the other, I suppose, is Miss Leonora, who is so very Low-Church. I think I can see the Miss Hemmings coming down George Street. If I were to go in I should be in a dreadful minority; but you are Low-Church in your heart too.”</p>
			<p>“No, dear; only reasonable,” said Miss Wodehouse, apologetically. “I don’t go as far as you and Mr. Wentworth do, but I like the service to be nicely done, and the⁠—the authority of the Church respected too. As I have never met Miss Wentworth, you had better come in and introduce me. There is Rosa looking out of the front window, Lucy. I really must speak to Mrs. Elsworthy about that child. What a lovely old lady that is sitting by the counter! Say I am your sister, and then if you are resolved upon Prickett’s Lane, you can go away.”</p>
			<p>“They are the two who wear the grey cloaks,” said Miss Leonora Wentworth to herself, as the introduction was effected. “I am glad to make your acquaintance, Miss Wodehouse. We are going to stay in Carlingford for a time, and to know a few pious families will be a great advantage. We don’t go much into society, in the usual sense of the word⁠—but, I am sure, to make the acquaintance of ladies who help my nephew so much in his work, is sure to be an advantage. I should like so much to hear from you how he gets on, for he does not say a great deal about it himself.”</p>
			<p>“He is so good and so nice,” said kind Miss Wodehouse, “he never makes a fuss about anything he does. I am sure, to see such young creatures so pious and so devoted, always goes to my heart. When we were young it used to be so different⁠—we took our own pleasure, and never thought of our fellow-creatures. And the young people are so good nowadays,” said the gentle woman, falling instinctively into her favourite sentiment. Miss Leonora looked at her with critical eyes.</p>
			<p>“We are none of us good,” said that iron-grey woman, whose neutral tints were so different from the soft dove-colour of her new acquaintance; “it does not become such sinful creatures to talk of anybody being good. Good works may only be beautiful sins, if they are not done in a true spirit,” said Miss Leonora, turning to her list of furnished houses with a little contempt. But the Miss Hemmings had come in while she was speaking, and it was seldom that such edifying talk was heard in Carlingford.</p>
			<p>“That is such a beautiful sentiment⁠—oh, if we only bore it always in mind!” murmured the eldest Miss Hemmings. “Mr. Elsworthy, I hope you have got the tracts I ordered. They are so much wanted here. Poor dear Mr. Bury would not believe his eyes if he could see Carlingford now, given up to Puseyism and Ritualism⁠—but good men are taken away from the evil to come. I will pay for them now, please.”</p>
			<p>“If you wish it, ma’am,” said Mr. Elsworthy. “The town <i>is</i> changed; I don’t say nothing different; but being in the ritual line as you say, you won’t find no church as it’s better done than in St. Roque’s. Mr. Wentworth never spares no pains, ma’am, on anything as he takes up. I’ve heard a deal of clergymen in my day, but <i>his</i> reading is beautiful; I can’t say as I ever heard reading as could equal it;⁠—and them choristers, though they’re hawful to manage, is trained as I never see boys trained in <i>my</i> life afore. There’s one of them houses, ma’am,” continued the optimist, turning to Miss Wentworth, “as is a beauty. Miss Wodehouse can tell you what it is; no lady in the land could desire a handsomer drawing-room; and as for the kitchings⁠—I don’t pretend to be a judge up-stairs, but being brought up a blacksmith, I know what’s what in a kitching-range. If you had all Grange Lane to dinner, there’s a range as is equal to it,” said Mr. Elsworthy with enthusiasm⁠—“and my wife will show you the ‘ouse.”</p>
			<p>“I knew Mr. Bury,” said Miss Leonora; “he was a precious man. Perhaps you have heard him mention the Miss Wentworths? I am very sorry to hear that there is no real work going on in the town. It is very sad that there should be nobody able to enter into the labours of such a saint.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed,” said Miss Wodehouse, who was excited, in spite of herself, by this conversation, “I think the Carlingford people go quite as much to church as in Mr. Bury’s days. I don’t think there is less religion than there used to be: there are not so many prayer meetings, perhaps; but⁠—”</p>
			<p>“There is nothing the carnal mind dislikes so much as prayer meetings,” said Miss Hemmings. “There is a house in Grove Street, if Miss Wentworth is looking for a house. I don’t know much about the kitchen-range, but I know it belongs to a very pious family, and they wish so much to let it. My sister and I would be so glad to take you there. It is not in the gay world, like Grange Lane.”</p>
			<p>“But you might want to ask people to dinner; and then we should be so near Frank,” said Miss Dora, whispering at her sister’s elbow. As for the second Miss Hemmings, she was dull of comprehension, and did not quite make out who the strangers were.</p>
			<p>“It is so sad to a feeling mind to see the mummeries that go on at St. Roque’s,” said this obtuse sister; “and I am afraid poor Mr. Wentworth must be in a bad way. They say there is the strangest man in his house⁠—some relation of his⁠—and he daren’t be seen in the daylight; and people begin to think there must be something wrong, and that Mr. Wentworth himself is involved; but what can you expect when there is no true Christian principle?” asked Miss Hemmings, triumphantly. It was a dreadful moment for the bystanders; for Miss Leonora turned round upon this new intelligence with keen eyes and attention; and Miss Dora interposed, weeping; and Miss Wodehouse grew so pale, that Mr. Elsworthy rushed for cold water, and thought she was going to faint. “Tell me all about this,” said Miss Leonora, with peremptory and commanding tones. “Oh, Leonora, I am sure my dear Frank has nothing to do with it, if there is anything wrong,” cried Miss Dora. Even Miss Wentworth herself was moved out of her habitual smile. She said, “He is my nephew”⁠—an observation which she had never been heard to make before, and which covered the second Miss Hemmings with confusion. As for Miss Wodehouse, she retreated very fast to a seat behind Miss Cecilia, and said nothing. The two who had arrived last slunk back upon each other with fiery glances of mutual reproach. The former three stood together in this emergency, full of curiosity, and perhaps a little anxiety. In this position of affairs, Mr. Elsworthy, being the only impartial person present, took the management of matters into his own hands.</p>
			<p>“Miss Hemmings and ladies, if you’ll allow <i>me</i>,” said Mr. Elsworthy, “it aint no more than a mistake. The new gentleman as is staying at Mrs. Hadwin’s may be an unfortunate gentleman for anything I can tell; but he aint no relation of our clergyman. There aint nobody belonging to Mr. Wentworth,” said the clerk of St. Roque’s, “but is a credit both to him and to Carlingford. There’s his brother, the Rev. Mr. Wentworth, as is the finest-spoken man, to be a clergyman, as I ever set eyes on; and there’s respected ladies as needn’t be named more particular. But the gentleman as is the subject of conversation is no more like Mr. Wentworth than⁠—asking pardon for the liberty⁠—I am. I may say as I have opportunities for knowing more than most,” said Mr. Elsworthy, modestly, “me and Rosa; for if there’s a thing Mr. Wentworth is particular about, it’s having his papers the first moment; and ladies as knows me knows I am one that never says more nor the truth. Not saying a word against the gentleman⁠—as is a most respectable gentleman, for anything I know against him⁠—he aint no connection of Mr. Wentworth. He’s Mrs. Hadwin’s lodger; and I wouldn’t say as he isn’t a relation there; but our clergyman has got no more to do with him than the babe unborn.”</p>
			<p>Mr. Elsworthy wiped his forehead after he had made this speech, and looked round for the approbation which he was aware he had deserved; and Miss Leonora Wentworth threw a glance of disdainful observation upon the unhappy lady who had caused this disturbance. “If your wife will come with us, we will go and look at the house,” she said, graciously. “I daresay if it is in Grange Lane it will suit us very well. My nephew is a very young man, Miss Wodehouse,” said Miss Leonora, who had not passed over the agitation of that gentle woman without some secret comments; “he does not take advice in his work, though it might be of great assistance to him; but I hope he’ll grow older and wiser, as indeed he cannot help doing if he lives. I hope you and your pretty sister will come to see us when we’re settled;⁠—I don’t see any sense, you know, in your grey cloaks⁠—I’m old, and you won’t mind me saying so; but I know what Frank Wentworth is,” said the indignant aunt, making a severe curtsy, accompanied by lightning glances at the shrinking background of female figures, as she went out of the shop.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Leonora! I always said you were fond of him, though you never would show it,” cried poor Miss Dora. “She is a great deal more affectionate than she will let anybody believe; and my dear Frank means nothing but good,” cried the too zealous champion. Miss Leonora turned back upon the threshold of the shop.</p>
			<p>“You will please to let me know what Dissenting chapels there are in the town, and what are the hours of the services,” she said. “There must surely be a Bethesda, or Zion, or something⁠—Salem? yes, to be sure;⁠—perhaps there’s somebody there that preaches the gospel. Send me word,” said the peremptory woman; and poor Miss Dora relapsed into her usual melancholy condition, and stole into the carriage in a broken-hearted manner, weeping under her veil.</p>
			<p>After which Miss Wodehouse went home, not having much heart for further visits. That is to say, she went all the way down Grange Lane, somewhat tremulous and uncertain in her steps, and went as far as Mrs. Hadwin’s, and hesitated at the door as if she meant to call there; but, thinking better of it, went on a little farther with very lingering steps, as if she did not know what she wanted. When she came back again, the door of Mrs. Hadwin’s garden was open, and the butcher’s boy stood blocking up the way, listening with all his ears to the notes of the whistle, soft and high and clear like the notes of a bird which come audibly from among the trees. Miss Wodehouse gave a little start when she heard it: again she hesitated, and looked in with such a wistful face that Sarah, the housemaid, who had been about to slam the door hastily upon the too tender butcher, involuntarily held it wide open for the expected visitor. “No, not to-day thank you,” said Miss Wodehouse. “I hope your mistress is quite well; give her my love, and say I meant to come in, but I have a bad headache. No, thank you; not to-day.” She went away after that with a wonderful expression of face, and reached home long before Lucy had come back from Prickett’s Lane. Miss Wodehouse was not good for much in the house. She went to the little boudoir up-stairs, and lay down on the sofa, and had some tea brought her by an anxious maid. She was very nervous, trembling she could not say why, and took up a novel which was lying on the sofa, and read the most affecting scene, and cried over it; and then her sweet old face cleared, and she felt better. When Lucy came in she kissed her sister, and drew down the blinds, and brought her the third volume, and then went away herself to arrange the dessert, and see that everything was in order for one of Mr. Wodehouse’s little parties. These were their respective parts in the house; and surely a more peaceful, and orderly, and affectionate house, was not to be found that spring evening, either in England or Grange Lane.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
