<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth retired to his own quarters with enough to think about for one morning. He could not make up his mind about Wodehouse⁠—whether he was guilty or not guilty. It seemed incredible that, penniless as he was, he could have succeeded in carrying off a girl so well known in Carlingford as Rosa Elsworthy; and, if he had taken her away, how did it happen that he himself had come back again? The Curate saw clearly enough that his only chance for exculpating himself in the sight of the multitude was by bringing home the guilt to somebody else; and in proportion to the utter scorn with which he had treated Elsworthy’s insinuations at first, was his serious apprehension now of the danger which surrounded him. He divined all that slander would make of it with the quickened intelligence of a man whose entire life, and reputation dearer than life, were at stake. If it could not be cleared up⁠—if even any investigation which he might be able to demand was not perfectly successful⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was quite well aware that the character of a clergyman was almost as susceptible as that of a woman, and that the vague stigma might haunt and overshadow him all his life. The thought was overwhelming at this moment, when his first hopes of finding a speedy solution of the mystery had come to nothing. If he had but lived a century earlier, the chances are that no doubt of Wodehouse’s guilt would have entered his mind; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was a man of the present age⁠—reasonable to a fault, and apt to consider other people as much as possible from their own point of view. He did not see, looking at the circumstances, how Wodehouse <i>could</i> be guilty; and the Curate would not permit the strong instinctive certainty that he <i>was</i> guilty, to move his own mind from what he imagined to be its better judgment. He was thinking it over very gloomily when his breakfast was brought to him and his letters, feeling that he could be sure of nobody in such an emergency, and dreading more the doubt of his friends than the clamour of the general world. He could bear (he imagined) to be hooted at in the streets, if it ever came to that; but to see the faces of those who loved him troubled with a torturing doubt of his truth was a terrible thought to the Perpetual Curate. And Lucy? But here the young man got up indignant and threw off his fears. He doubted her regard with a doubt which threw darkness over the whole universe; but that she should be able for a moment to doubt his entire devotion to her, seemed a blindness incredible. No; let who would believe ill of him in this respect, to Lucy such an accusation must look as monstrous as it was untrue. <i>She</i>, at least, knew otherwise; and, taking this false comfort to his heart, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth took up his letters, and presently was deep in the anxieties of his brother Gerald, who wrote to him as to a man at leisure, and without any overwhelming perplexities of his own. It requires a very high amount of unselfishness in the person thus addressed to prevent a degree of irritation which is much opposed to sympathy; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, though he was very impartial and reasonable, was not, being still young and meaning to be happy, unselfish to any inhuman degree. He put down Gerald’s letter, after he had read through half of it, with an exclamation of impatience which he could not restrain, and then poured out his coffee, which had got cold in the mean time, and gulped it down with a sense of half-comforting disgust⁠—for there are moments when the mortification of the flesh is a relief to the spirit; and then it occurred to him to remember Wodehouse’s tray, which was a kind of love-offering to the shabby vagabond, and the perfect good order in which <i>he</i> had his breakfast; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth laughed at himself with a whimsical perception of all that was absurd in his own position which did him good, and broke the spell of his solitary musings. When he took up Gerald’s letter again, he read it through. A man more sympathetic, open-hearted, and unselfish than Gerald Wentworth did not exist in the world, as his brother well knew; but nevertheless, Gerald’s mind was so entirely preoccupied that he passed over the Curate’s cares with the lightest reference imaginable. “I hope you found all right when you got back, and nothing seriously amiss with Jack,” the elder brother wrote, and then went on to his own affairs. All right! nothing seriously amiss! To a man who felt himself standing on the edge of possible ruin, such expressions seemed strange indeed.</p>
			<p>The Rector of Wentworth, however, had enough in his mind to excuse him for a momentary forgetfulness of others. Things had taken a different turn with him since his brother left. He had been so busy with his change of faith and sentiment, that the practical possibilities of the step which he contemplated had not disturbed Gerald. He had taken it calmly for granted that he <i>could</i> do what he wanted to do. But a new light had burst upon him in that respect, and changed the character of his thoughts. Notwithstanding the conviction into which he had reasoned himself, the Rector of Wentworth had not contemplated the idea of becoming simply a Catholic layman. He was nothing if not a priest, he had said, passionately. He could have made a martyr of himself⁠—have suffered tortures and deaths with the steadiest endurance; but he could not face the idea of taking all meaning and significance out of his life, by giving up the profession which he felt to be laid upon him by orders indelible, beyond the power of circumstances to revoke. Such was the new complication to which Gerald had come. He was terribly staggered in his previous resolution by this new doubt, and he wrote to pour his difficulties into the ear of his brother. It had been Frank’s question which first awoke in his mind a doubt as to the practicability of the step he contemplated; and one of Louisa’s relations, appealed to by her in her next access of terror, had brought this aspect of the matter still more distinctly before the Rector of Wentworth. Gerald had been studying Canon law, but his English intelligence did not make very much of it; and the bare idea of a dispensation making that right which in itself was wrong, touched the high-minded gentleman to the quick, and brought him to a sudden standstill. He who was nothing if not a priest, stood sorrowfully looking at his contemplated martyrdom⁠—like Brother Domenico of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mark’s sighing on the edge of the fiery ordeal into which the Church herself would not let him plunge. If it was so, he no longer knew what to do. He would have wrapped the vestment of the new priesthood about him, though it was a garment of fire; but to stand aside in irksome leisure was a harder trial, at which he trembled. This was the new complication in which Gerald asked his brother’s sympathy and counsel. It was a long letter, curiously introspective, and full of self-argument; and it was hard work, with a mind so occupied as was that of the Perpetual Curate, to give it due attention. He put it away when he had done with his cold breakfast, and deferred the consideration of the subject, with a kind of vague hope that the family firmament might possibly brighten in that quarter at least; but the far-off and indistinct interest with which he viewed, across his own gloomy surroundings, this matter which had engrossed him so completely a few days before, was wonderful to see.</p>
			<p>And then he paused to think what he was to do. To go out and face the slander which must already have crept forth on its way⁠—to see Elsworthy and ascertain whether he had come to his senses, and try if anything could be done for Rosa’s discovery⁠—to exert himself somehow, in short, and get rid of the feverish activity which he felt consuming him⁠—that was what he longed to do. But, on the other hand, it was Saturday, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was conscious that it would be more dignified, and in better taste altogether, if he went on writing his sermon and took no notice of this occurrence, with which, in reality, he had nothing to do. It was difficult, but no doubt it was the best; and he tried it accordingly⁠—putting down a great many sentences which had to be scratched out again, and spoiling altogether the appearance of the sermon-paper. When a message came from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s about eleven o’clock, bringing the news that he was much worse and not expected to live, and begging <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s immediate presence, the Curate was as nearly glad as it was possible for a man to be under the circumstances. He had “a feeling heart,” as even Elsworthy allowed, but in such a moment of excitement any kind of great and terrible event seemed to come natural. He hastened out into the fresh morning sunshine, which still seemed thrilling with life and joy, and went up Grange Lane with a certain sense of curiosity, wondering whether everybody was already aware of what had happened. A long way off a figure which much resembled that of the Rector was visible crossing over to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks’s door; and it occurred to the Curate that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan was crossing to avoid him, which brought a smile of anger and involuntary dislike to his face, and nerved him for any other encounter. The green door at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s⁠—a homely sign of the trouble in the house⁠—had been left unlatched, and was swinging ajar with the wind when the Curate came up; and as he went in (closing it carefully after him, for that forlorn little touch of carelessness went to his heart), he encountered in the garden <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider, who were coming out together with very grave looks. They did not stop for much conversation, only pausing to tell him that the case was hopeless, and that the patient could not possibly live beyond a day or two at most; but even in the few words that were spoken <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth perceived, or thought he perceived, that something had occurred to lessen him in the esteem of the shrewd old Scotch doctor, who contemplated him and his prayer-book with critical eyes. “I confess, after all, that there are cases in which written prayers are a kind of security,” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks said in an irrelevant manner to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rider when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth had passed them⁠—an observation at which, in ordinary cases, the Curate would have smiled; but to-day the colour rose to his face, and he understood that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks did not think him qualified to carry comfort or instruction to a sick-bed. Perhaps the old doctor had no such idea in his mind⁠—perhaps it was simply a relic of his national Presbyterianism, to which the old Scotchman kept up a kind of visionary allegiance. But whether he meant it or not, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth understood it as a reproach to himself, and went on with a bitter feeling of mortification to the sick-room. He had gone with his whole heart into his priestly office, and had been noted for his ministrations to the sick and poor; but now his feelings were much too personal for the atmosphere into which he was just about to enter. He stopped at the door to tell John that he would take a stroll round the garden before he came in, as he had a headache, and went on through the walks which were sacred to Lucy, not thinking of her, but wondering bitterly whether anybody would stand by him, or whether an utterly baseless slander would outweigh all the five years of his life which he had spent among the people of Carlingford. Meanwhile John stood at the door and watched him, and of course thought it was very “queer.” “It aint as if he’d a-been sitting up all night, like our young ladies,” said John to himself, and unconsciously noted the circumstance down in his memory against the Curate.</p>
			<p>When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth entered the sick-room, he found all very silent and still in that darkened chamber. Lucy was seated by the bedside, wrapped in a loose dressing-gown, and looked as if she had not slept for several nights; while Miss Wodehouse, who, notwithstanding all her anxiety to be of use, was far more helpless than Lucy, stood on the side next the door, with her eyes fixed on her sister, watching with pathetic unserviceableness for the moment when she could be of some use. As for the patient himself, he lay in a kind of stupor, from which he scarcely ever could be roused, and showed no tokens at the moment of hearing or seeing anybody. The scene was doubly sad, but it was without the excitement which so often breathes in the atmosphere of death. There was no eager listening for the last word, no last outbreaks of tenderness. The daughters were both hushed into utter silence; and Lucy, who was more reasonable than her sister, had even given up those wistful beseeching looks at the patient, with which Miss Wodehouse still regarded him, as if perhaps he might be thus persuaded to speak. The nurse whom <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Marjoribanks had sent to assist them was visible through an open door, sleeping very comfortably in the adjoining room. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth came into the silent chamber with all his anxieties throbbing in his heart, bringing life at its very height of agitation and tumult into the presence of death. He went forward to the bed, and tried for an instant to call up any spark of intelligence that might yet exist within the mind of the dying man; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse was beyond the voice of any priest. The Curate said the prayers for the dying at the bedside, suddenly filled with a great pity for the man who was thus taking leave unawares of all this mournful splendid world. Though the young man knew many an ordinary sentiment about the vanity of life, and had given utterance to that effect freely in the way of his duty, he was still too fresh in his heart to conceive actually that any one could leave the world without poignant regrets; and when his prayer was finished, he stood looking at the patient with inexpressible compassion. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse had scarcely reached old age; he was well off, and only a week ago seemed to have so much to enjoy; now, here he lay stupefied, on the edge of the grave, unable to respond even by a look to the love that surrounded him. Once more there rose in the heart of the young priest a natural impulse of resentment and indignation; and when he thought of the cause of this change, he remembered Wodehouse’s threat, and roused himself from his contemplation of the dying to think of the probable fate of those who must live.</p>
			<p>“Has he made his will?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, suddenly. He forgot that it was Lucy who was standing by him; and it was only when he caught a glance of reproach and horror from her eyes that he recollected how abrupt his question was. “Pardon me,” he said; “you think me heartless to speak of it at such a time; but tell me, if you know: Miss Wodehouse, has he made his will?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, I don’t know anything about business,” said the elder sister. “He said he would; but we have had other things to think of⁠—more important things,” said poor Miss Wodehouse, wringing her hands, and looking at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth with eyes full of warning and meaning, beseeching him not to betray her secret. She came nearer to the side of the bed on which Lucy and the Curate were standing, and plucked at his sleeve in her anxiety. “We have had very different things to think of. Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, what does it matter?” said the poor lady, interposing her anxious looks, which suggested every kind of misfortune, between the two.</p>
			<p>“It matters everything in the world,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. “Pardon me if I wound you⁠—I must speak; if it is possible to rouse him, an effort must be made. Send for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters. He must not be allowed to go out of the world and leave your interests in the hands of⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, hush, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, hush!⁠—oh, hush, hush! Don’t say any more,” cried Miss Wodehouse, grasping his arm in her terror.</p>
			<p>Lucy rose from where she had been sitting at the bedside. She had grown paler than before, and looked almost stern in her youthful gravity. “I will not permit my father to be disturbed,” she said. “I don’t know what you mean, or what you are talking of; but he is not to be disturbed. Do you think I will let him be vexed in his last hours about money or anybody’s interest?” she said, turning upon the Curate a momentary glance of scorn. Then she sat down again, with a pang of disappointment added to her grief. She could not keep her heart so much apart from him, as not to expect a little comfort from his presence. And there had been comfort in his prayers and his looks; but to hear him speak of wills and worldly affairs by her father’s deathbed, as any man might have done, went to Lucy’s heart. She sat down again, putting her hand softly upon the edge of the pillow, to guard the peace of those last moments which were ebbing away so rapidly. What if all the comfort of the world hung upon it? Could she let her kind father be troubled in his end for anything so miserable? Lucy turned her indignant eyes upon the others with silent resolution. It was she who was <i>his</i> protector now.</p>
			<p>“But it must be done,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth. “You will understand me hereafter. Miss Wodehouse, you must send for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters, and in the mean time I will do what I can to rouse him. It is no such cruelty as you think,” said the Curate, with humility; “it is not for money or interest only⁠—it concerns all the comfort of your life.”</p>
			<p>This he said to Lucy, who sat defending her father. She, for her part, looked up at him with eyes that broke his heart. At that moment of all others, the unfortunate Curate perceived, by a sudden flash of insight, that nothing less than love could look at him with such force of disappointment and reproach and wounded feeling. He replied to the look by a gesture of mingled entreaty and despair.</p>
			<p>“What can I do?” he cried⁠—“you have no one else to care for you. I cannot even explain to you all that is at stake. I must act as I ought, even though you hate me for it. Let us send for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters;⁠—if there is a will⁠—”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth had raised his voice a little in the excitement of the moment, and the word caught the dull ear of the dying man. The Curate saw instantly that there was comprehension in the flicker of the eyelash and the tremulous movement of the hand upon the bed. It was a new and unaccustomed part which he had now to play; he went hurriedly to the other side and leaned over the pillow to make out the stammering words which began to be audible. Lucy had risen up also and stood looking at her father still with her look of defence. As the feeble lips babbled forth unintelligible words, Lucy’s face grew sterner and sterner. As for Miss Wodehouse, she stood behind, crying and trembling. “Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, do you think it is returning life⁠—do you think he is better?” she cried, looking wistfully at the Curate; and between the two young people, who were leaning with looks and feelings so different over his bed, the patient lay struggling with those terrible bonds of weakness, labouring to find expression for something which wrought him into a fever of excitement. While <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth bent his ear closer and closer, trying to make some sense of the inarticulate torrent of sound, Lucy, inspired by grief and horror and indignation, leaned over her father on the other side, doing everything possible to calm him. “Oh, papa, don’t say any more⁠—don’t say any more; we understand you,” she cried, and put her soft hands upon his flushed forehead, and her cheek to his. “No more, no more!” cried the girl in the dulled ear which could not hear. “We will do everything you wish⁠—we understand all,” said Lucy. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth withdrew vanquished in that strange struggle⁠—he stood looking on while she caressed and calmed and subdued into silence the dying passion which he would have given anything in the world to stimulate into clearer utterance. She had baffled his efforts, made him helpless to serve her, perhaps injured herself cruelly; but all the more the Curate loved her for it, as she expanded over her dying father, with the white sleeves hanging loose about her arms like the white wings of an angel, as he thought. Gradually the agony of utterance got subdued, and then Lucy resumed her position by the bed. “He shall not be disturbed,” she said again, through lips that were parched with emotion; and so sat watchful over him, a guardian immovable, ready to defy all the world in defence of his peace.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth turned away with his heart full. He would have liked to go and kiss her hand or her sleeve or anything belonging to her; and yet he was impatient beyond expression, and felt that she had baffled and vanquished him. Miss Wodehouse stood behind, still looking on with a half perception of what had happened; but the mind of the elder sister was occupied with vain hopes and fears, such as inexperienced people are subject to in the presence of death.</p>
			<p>“He heard what you said,” said Miss Wodehouse; “don’t you think that was a good sign? Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, sometimes I think he looks a little better,” said the poor lady, looking wistfully into the Curate’s face. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth could only shake his head as he hurried away.</p>
			<p>“I must go and consult <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters,” he said, as he passed her. “I shall come back presently;” and then Miss Wodehouse followed him to the door, to beg him not to speak to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters of <i>anything particular</i>⁠—“For papa has no confidence in him,” she said, anxiously. The Curate was nearly driven to his wits’ end as he hastened out. He forgot the clouds that surrounded him in his anxiety about this sad household; for it seemed but too evident that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse had made no special provision for his daughters; and to think of Lucy under the power of her unknown brother, made <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s blood boil.</p>
			<p>The shutters were all put up that afternoon in the prettiest house in Grange Lane. The event took Carlingford altogether by surprise; but other events just then were moving the town into the wildest excitement; for nothing could be heard, far or near, of poor little Rosa Elsworthy, and everybody was aware that the last time she was seen in Carlingford she was standing by herself in the dark, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s garden-door.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
