<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-41" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</h2>
			<p>Next morning the Curate got up with anticipations which were far from cheerful, and a weary sense of the monotony and dullness of life. He had won his little battle, it was true; but the very victory had removed that excitement which answered in the absence of happier stimulations to keep up his heart and courage. After a struggle like that in which he had been engaged, it was hard to come again into the peaceable routine without any particular hope to enliven or happiness to cheer it, which was all he had at present to look for in his life; and it was harder still to feel the necessity of being silent, of standing apart from Lucy in her need, of shutting up in his own heart the longing he had towards her, and refraining himself from the desperate thought of uniting his genteel beggary to hers. That was the one thing which must not be thought of, and he subdued himself with an impatient sigh, and could not but wonder, as he went downstairs, whether, if Gerald had been less smoothly guided through the perplexing paths of life, he would have found time for all the difficulties which had driven him to take refuge in Rome. It was with this sense of hopeless restraint and incapacity, which is perhaps of all sensations the most humbling, that he went downstairs, and found lying on his breakfast table, the first thing that met his eye, the note which Lucy Wodehouse had written to him on the previous night. As he read it, the earth somehow turned to the sun; the dubious light brightened in the skies. Unawares, he had been wondering never to receive any token of sympathy, any word of encouragement, from those for whom he had made so many exertions. When he had read Lucy’s letter, the aspect of affairs changed considerably. To be sure, nothing that she had said or could say made any difference in the facts of the case; but the Curate was young, and still liable to those changes of atmosphere which do more for an imaginative mind than real revolutions. He read the letter several times over as he lingered through his breakfast, making on the whole an agreeable meal, and finding himself repossessed of his ordinary healthful appetite. He even canvassed the signature as much in reading as Lucy had done in writing it⁠—balancing in his mind the maidenly “truly yours” of that subscription with as many ingenious renderings of its possible meaning as if Lucy’s letter had been articles of faith. “Truly mine,” he said to himself, with a smile; which indeed meant all a lover could require; and then paused, as if he had been <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Lushington or Lord Westbury, to inquire into the real force of the phrase. For after all, it is not only when signing the Articles that the bond and pledge of subscription means more than is intended. When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was able to tear himself from the agreeable casuistry of this self-discussion, he got up in much better spirits to go about his daily business. First of all, he had to see his father, and ascertain what were the Squire’s intentions, and how long he meant to stay in Carlingford; and then⁠—It occurred to the Perpetual Curate that after that, politeness demanded that he should call on the Miss Wodehouses, who had, or at least one of them, expressed so frankly their confidence in him. He could not but call to thank her, to inquire into their plans, perhaps to back aunt Leonora’s invitation, which he was aware had been gratefully declined. With these ideas in his mind he went downstairs, after brushing his hat very carefully and casting one solicitous glance in the mirror as he passed⁠—which presented to him a very creditable reflection, an eidolon in perfect clerical apparel, without any rusty suggestions of a Perpetual Curacy. Yet a Perpetual Curacy it was which was his sole benefice or hope in his present circumstances, for he knew very well that, were all other objections at an end, neither Skelmersdale nor Wentworth could be kept open for him; and that beyond these two he had not a hope of advancement⁠—and at the same time he was pledged to remain in Carlingford. All this, however, though discouraging enough, did not succeed in discouraging <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth after he had read Lucy’s letter. He went downstairs so lightly that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin, who was waiting in the parlour in her best cap, to ask if he would pardon her for making such a mistake, did not hear him pass, and sat waiting for an hour, forgetting, or rather neglecting to give any response, when the butcher came for orders⁠—which was an unprecedented accident. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth went cheerfully up Grange Lane, meeting, by a singular chance, ever so many people, who stopped to shake hands with him, or at least bowed their good wishes and friendly acknowledgments. He smiled in himself at these evidences of popular penitence, but was not the less pleased to find himself reinstated in his place in the affections and respect of Carlingford. “After all, it was not an unnatural mistake,” he said to himself, and smiled benignly upon the excellent people who had found out the error of their own ways. Carlingford, indeed, seemed altogether in a more cheerful state than usual, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth could not but think that the community in general was glad to find that it had been deceived, and so went upon his way, pleasing himself with those maxims about the ultimate prevalence of justice and truth, which make it apparent that goodness is always victorious, and wickedness punished, in the end. Somehow even a popular fallacy has an aspect of truth when it suits one’s own case. The Perpetual Curate went through his aunts’ garden with a conscious smile, feeling once more master of himself and his concerns. There was, to tell the truth, even a slight shade of self-content and approbation upon his handsome countenance. In the present changed state of public opinion and private feeling, he began to take some pleasure in his sacrifice. To be sure, a Perpetual Curate could not marry; but perhaps Lucy⁠—in short, there was no telling what might happen; and it was accordingly with that delicious sense of goodness which generally attends an act of self-sacrifice, mingled with an equally delicious feeling that the act, when accomplished, might turn out no such great sacrifice after all⁠—which it is to be feared is the most usual way in which the sacrifices of youth are made⁠—that the Curate walked into the hall, passing his aunt Dora’s toy terrier without that violent inclination to give it a whack with his cane in passing which was his usual state of feeling. To tell the truth, Lucy’s letter had made him at peace with all the world.</p>
			<p>When, however, he entered the dining-room, where the family were still at breakfast, Frank’s serenity was unexpectedly disturbed. The first thing that met his eyes was his aunt Leonora, towering over her tea-urn at the upper end of the table, holding in her hand a letter which she had just opened. The envelope had fallen in the midst of the immaculate breakfast “things,” and indeed lay, with its broad black edge on the top of the snow-white lumps, in Miss Leonora’s own sugar-basin; and the news had been sufficiently interesting to suspend the operations of tea-making, and to bring the strong-minded woman to her feet. The first words which were audible to Frank revealed to him the nature of the intelligence which had produced such startling effects.</p>
			<p>“He was always a contradictory man,” said Miss Leonora; “since the first hour he was in Skelmersdale, he has made a practice of doing things at the wrong time. I don’t mean to reproach the poor man now he’s gone; but when he has been so long of going, what good could it do him to choose this particular moment, for no other reason that I can see, except that it was specially uncomfortable to us? What my brother has just been saying makes it all the worse,” said Miss Leonora, with a look of annoyance. She had turned her head away from the door, which was at the side of the room, and had not perceived the entrance of the Curate. “As long as we could imagine that Frank was to succeed to the Rectory, the thing looked comparatively easy. I beg your pardon, Gerald. Of course, you know how grieved I am⁠—in short, that we all feel the deepest distress and vexation; but, to be sure, since you have given it up, somebody must succeed you⁠—there can be no doubt of that.”</p>
			<p>“Not the least, my dear aunt,” said Gerald.</p>
			<p>“I am glad you grant so much. It is well to be sure of something,” said the incisive and peremptory speaker. “It would have been a painful thing for us at any time to place another person in Skelmersdale while Frank was unprovided for; but, of course,” said Miss Leonora, sitting down suddenly, “nobody who knows me could suppose for a minute that I would let my feelings stand in the way of my public duty. Still it is very awkward just at this moment when Frank, on the whole, has been behaving very properly, and one can’t help so far approving of him⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I am much obliged to you, aunt Leonora,” said the Curate.</p>
			<p>“Oh, you are there, Frank,” said his sensible aunt; and strong-minded though she was, a slight shade of additional colour appeared for a moment on Miss Leonora’s face. She paused a little, evidently diverted from the line of discourse which she had contemplated, and wavered like a vessel disturbed in its course. “The fact is, I have just had a letter announcing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shirley’s death,” she continued, facing round towards her nephew, and setting off abruptly, in face of all consequences, on the new tack.</p>
			<p>“I am very sorry,” said Frank Wentworth; “though I have an old grudge at him on account of his long sermons; but as you have expected it for a year or two, I can’t imagine your grief to be overwhelming,” said the Curate, with a touch of natural impertinence to be expected under the circumstances. Skelmersdale had been so long thought interesting to him, that now, when it was not in the least interesting, he got impatient of the name.</p>
			<p>“I quite agree with you, Frank,” said Miss Wentworth. Aunt Cecilia had not been able for a long time to agree with anybody. She had been, on the contrary, shaking her head and shedding a few gentle tears over Gerald’s silent submission and Louisa’s noisy lamentations. Everything was somehow going wrong; and she who had no power to mend, at least could not assent, and broke through her old use and wont to shake her head, which was a thing very alarming to the family. The entire party was moved by a sensation of pleasure to hear Miss Cecilia say, “I quite agree with you, Frank.”</p>
			<p>“You are looking better this morning, my dear aunt,” said Gerald. They had a great respect for each other these two; but when Miss Cecilia turned to hear what her elder nephew was saying, her face lost the momentary look of approval it had worn, and she again, though very softly, almost imperceptibly, began to shake her head.</p>
			<p>“We were not asking for your sympathy,” said Miss Leonora, sharply. “Don’t talk like a saucy boy. We were talking of our own embarrassment. There is a very excellent young man, the curate of the parish, whom Julia Trench is to be married to. By the way, of course, this must put it off; but I was about to say, when you interrupted me, that to give it away from you at this moment, just as you had been doing well⁠—doing⁠—your duty,” said Miss Leonora, with unusual hesitation, “was certainly very uncomfortable, to say the least, to us.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t let that have the slightest influence on you, I beg,” cried the Perpetual Curate, with all the pride of his years. “I hope I have been doing my duty all along,” the young man added, more softly, a moment after; upon which the Squire gave a little nod, partly of satisfaction and encouragement to his son⁠—partly of remonstrance and protest to his sister.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I suppose so⁠—with the flowers at Easter, for example,” said Miss Leonora, with a slight sneer. “I consider that I have stood by you through all this business, Frank⁠—but, of course, in so important a matter as a cure of souls, neither relationship, nor, to a certain extent, approval,” said Miss Leonora, with again some hesitation, “can be allowed to stand against public duty. We have the responsibility of providing a good gospel minister⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon for interrupting you, Leonora,” said the Squire, “but I can’t help thinking that you make a mistake. I think it’s a man’s bounden duty, when there is a living in the family, to educate one of his sons for it. In my opinion, it’s one of the duties of property. You have no right to live off your estate, and spend your money elsewhere; and no more have you any right to give less than⁠—than your own flesh and blood to the people you have the charge of. You’ve got the charge of them to⁠—to a certain extent⁠—soul and body, sir,” said the Squire, growing warm, as he put down his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i>, and forgetting that he addressed a lady. “I’d never have any peace of mind if I filled up a family living with a stranger⁠—unless, of course,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth added in a parenthesis⁠—an unlikely sort of contingency which had not occurred to him at first⁠—“you should happen to have no second son.⁠—The eldest the squire, the second the rector. That’s my idea, Leonora, of Church and State.”</p>
			<p>Miss Leonora smiled a little at her brother’s semi-feudal, semi-pagan ideas. “I have long known that we were not of the same way of thinking,” said the strong-minded aunt, who, though cleverer than her brother, was too wise in her own conceit to perceive at the first glance the noble, simple conception of his own duties and position, which was implied in the honest gentleman’s words. “Your second son might be either a fool or a knave, or even, although neither, might be quite unfit to be entrusted with the eternal interests of his fellow-creatures. In my opinion, the duty of choosing a clergyman is one not to be exercised without the gravest deliberation. A conscientious man would make his selection dependent, at least, upon the character of his second son⁠—if he had one. We, however⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But then his character is <em>so</em> satisfactory, Leonora,” cried Miss Dora, feeling emboldened by the shadow of visitors under whose shield she could always retire. “Everybody knows what a good clergyman he is⁠—I am sure it would be like a new world in Skelmersdale if you were there, Frank, my dear⁠—and he preaches such beautiful sermons!” said the unlucky little woman, upon whom her sister immediately descended, swift and sudden, like a storm at sea.</p>
			<p>“We are generally perfectly of accord in our conclusions,” said Miss Leonora; “as for Dora, she comes to the same end by a roundabout way. After what my brother has been saying⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the Squire, with uncomfortable looks, “I was saying to your aunt, Frank, what I said to you about poor Mary. Since Gerald <em>will</em> go, and since you don’t want to come, the best thing to do would be to have Huxtable. He’s a very good fellow on the whole, and it might cheer her up, poor soul, to be near her sisters. Life has been hard work to her, poor girl⁠—very hard work, sir,” said the Squire, with a sigh. The idea was troublesome and uncomfortable, and always disturbed his mind when it occurred to him. It was indeed a secret humiliation to the Squire, that his eldest daughter possessed so little the characteristic health and prosperity of the Wentworths. He was very sorry for her, but yet half angry and half ashamed, as if she could have helped it; but, however, he had been obliged to admit, in his private deliberations on the subject, that, failing Frank, Mary’s husband had the next best right to Wentworth Rectory⁠—an arrangement of which Miss Leonora did not approve.</p>
			<p>“I was about to say that we have no second son,” she said, taking up the thread of her discourse where it had been interrupted. “Our duty is solely towards the Christian people. I do not pretend to be infallible,” said Miss Leonora, with a meek air of self-contradiction; “but I should be a very poor creature indeed, if, at my age, I did not know what I believed, and was not perfectly convinced that I am right. Consequently (though, I repeat, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shirley has chosen the most inconvenient moment possible for dying), it can’t be expected of me that I should appoint my nephew, whose opinions in most points are exactly the opposite of mine.”</p>
			<p>“I wish, at least, you would believe what I say,” interrupted the Curate, impatiently. “There might have been some sense in all this three months ago; but if Skelmersdale were the highroad to everything desirable in the Church, you are all quite aware that I could not accept it. Stop, Gerald; I am not so disinterested as you think,” said Frank; “if I left Carlingford now, people would remember against me that my character had been called in question here. I can remain a perpetual curate,” said the young man, with a smile, “but I can’t tolerate any shadow upon my honour. I am sorry I came in at such an awkward moment. Good morning, aunt Leonora. I hope Julia Trench, when she has the Rectory, will always keep of your way of thinking. She used to incline a little to mine,” he said, mischievously, as he went away.</p>
			<p>“Come back, Frank, presently,” said the Squire, whose attention had been distracted from his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i>. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wentworth began to be tired of such a succession of exciting discussions. He thought if he had Frank quietly to himself he could settle matters much more agreeably; but the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Times</i> was certainly an accompaniment more tranquillising so far as a comfortable meal was concerned.</p>
			<p>“He can’t come back presently,” said aunt Leonora. “You speak as if he had nothing to do; when, on the contrary, he has everything to do⁠—that is worth doing,” said that contradictory authority. “Come back to lunch, Frank; and I wish you would eat your breakfast, Dora, and not stare at me.”</p>
			<p>Miss Dora had come down to breakfast as an invalid, in a pretty little cap, with a shawl over her dressing-gown. She had not yet got over her adventure and the excitement of Rosa’s capture. That unusual accident, and all the applauses of her courage which had been addressed to her since, had roused the timid woman. She did not withdraw her eyes from her sister, though commanded to do so; on the contrary, her look grew more and more emphatic. She meant to have made a solemn address, throwing off Leonora’s yoke, and declaring her intention, in this grave crisis of her nephew’s fortunes, of acting for herself; but her feelings were too much for Miss Dora. The tears came creeping to the corners of her eyes, and she could not keep them back; and her attempt at dignity broke down. “I am never consulted,” she said, with a gasp. “I don’t mean to pretend to know better than Leonora; but⁠—but I think it is very hard that Frank should be disappointed about Skelmersdale. You may call me as foolish as you please,” said Miss Dora, with rising tears, “I know everybody will say it is my fault; but I must say I think it is very hard that Frank should be disappointed. He was always brought up for it, as everybody knows; and to disappoint him, who is so good and so nice, for a fat young man, buttered all over like⁠—like⁠—a pudding-basin,” cried poor Miss Dora, severely adhering to the unity of her desperate metaphor. “I don’t know what Julia Trench can be thinking of; I⁠—I don’t know what Leonora means.”</p>
			<p>“I am of the same way of thinking,” said aunt Cecilia, setting down, with a little gentle emphasis, her cup of tea.</p>
			<p>Here was rebellion, open and uncompromised. Miss Leonora was so much taken by surprise, that she lifted the tea-urn out of the way, and stared at her interlocutors with genuine amazement. But she proved herself, as usual, equal to the occasion.</p>
			<p>“It’s unfortunate that we never see eye to eye just at once,” she said, with a look which expressed more distinctly than words could have done the preliminary flourish of his whip by means of which a skilful charioteer gets his team under hand without touching them; “but it is very lucky that we always come to agree in the end,” she added, more significantly still. It was well to crush insubordination in the bud. Not that she did not share the sentiment of her sisters; but then they were guided like ordinary women by their feelings; whereas Miss Leonora had the rights of property before her, and the approval of Exeter Hall.</p>
			<p>“And he wants to marry, poor dear boy,” said Miss Dora, pale with fright, yet persevering; “and she is a dear good girl⁠—the very person for a clergyman’s wife; and what is he to do if he is always to be Curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s? You may say it is my fault, but I cannot help it. He always used to come to me in all his little troubles; and when he wants anything very particular, he knows there is nothing I would not do for him,” sobbed the proud aunt, who could not help recollecting how much use she had been to Frank. She wiped her eyes at the thought, and held up her head with a thrill of pride and satisfaction. Nobody could blame her in that particular at least. “He knew he had only to tell me what he wanted,” said Miss Dora, swelling out her innocent plumes. Jack, who was sitting opposite, and who had been listening with admiration, thought it time to come in on his own part.</p>
			<p>“I hope you don’t mean to forsake <em>me</em>, aunt Dora,” he said. “If a poor fellow cannot have faith in his aunt, whom can he have faith in? I thought it was too good to last,” said the neglected prodigal. “You have left the poor sheep in the wilderness and gone back to the ninety-and-nine righteous men who need no repentance.” He put up his handkerchief to his eyes as he spoke, and so far forgot himself as to look with laughter in his face at his brother Gerald. As for the Squire, he was startled to hear his eldest son quoting Scripture, and laid aside his paper once more to know what it meant.</p>
			<p>“I am sure I beg your pardon, Jack,” said aunt Dora, suddenly stopping short, and feeling guilty. “I never meant to neglect you. Poor dear boy, he never was properly tried with female society and the comforts of home; but then you were dining out that night,” said the simple woman, eagerly. “I should have stayed with you, Jack, <em>of course</em>, had you been at home.”</p>
			<p>From this little scene Miss Leonora turned away hastily, with an exclamation of impatience. She made an abrupt end of her tea-making, and went off to her little business-room with a grim smile upon her iron-grey countenance. She too had been taken in a little by Jack’s pleasant farce of the Sinner Repentant; and it occurred to her to feel a little ashamed of herself as she went upstairs. After all, the ninety-and-nine just men of Jack’s irreverent quotation were worth considering now and then; and Miss Leonora could not but think with a little humiliation of the contrast between her nephew Frank and the comfortable young Curate who was going to marry Julia Trench. He <em>was</em> fat, it could not be denied; and she remembered his chubby looks, and his sermons about self-denial and mortification of the flesh, much as a pious Catholic might think of the Lenten oratory of a fat friar. But then he was perfectly sound in his doctrines, and it was undeniable that the people liked him, and that the appointment was one which even a Scotch ecclesiastical community full of popular rights could scarcely have objected to. According to her own principles, the strong-minded woman could not do otherwise. She threw herself into her armchair with unnecessary force, and read over the letter which Miss Trench herself had written. “It is difficult to think of any consolation in such a bereavement,” wrote <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Shirley’s niece; “but still it is a little comfort to feel that I can throw myself on your sympathy, my dear and kind friend.” “Little calculating thing!” Miss Leonora said to herself as she threw down the mournful epistle; and then she could not help thinking again of Frank. To be sure, he was not of her way of thinking; but when she remembered the “investigation” and its result, and the secret romance involved in it, her Wentworth blood sent a thrill of pride and pleasure through her veins. Miss Leonora, though she was strong-minded, was still woman enough to perceive her nephew’s motives in his benevolence to Wodehouse; but these motives, which were strong enough to make him endure so much annoyance, were not strong enough to tempt him from Carlingford and his Perpetual Curacy, where his honour and reputation, in the face of love and ambition, demanded that he should remain. “It would be a pity to balk him in his self-sacrifice,” she said to herself, with again a somewhat grim smile, and a comparison not much to the advantage of Julia Trench and <em>her</em> curate. She shut herself up among her papers till luncheon, and only emerged with a stormy front when that meal was on the table; during the progress of which she snubbed everybody who ventured to speak to her, and spoke to her nephew Frank as if he might have been suspected of designs upon the plate-chest. Such were the unpleasant consequences of the struggle between duty and inclination in the bosom of Miss Leonora; and, save for other unforeseen events which decided the matter for her, it is not by any means so certain as, judging from her character, it ought to have been, that duty would have won the day.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
