<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XLVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-46" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</h2>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth did not accept <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Morgan’s sudden invitation, partly because his “people” did not leave Carlingford that evening, and partly because, though quite amiably disposed towards the Rector, whom he had worsted in fair fight, he was not sufficiently interested in anything he was likely to hear or see in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morgan’s house to move him to spend his evening there. He returned a very civil answer to the invitation of the Rector’s wife, thanking her warmly for her friendliness, and explaining that he could not leave his father on the last night of his stay in Carlingford; after which he went to dinner at his aunts’, where the household was still much agitated. Not to speak of all the events which had happened and were happening, Jack, who had begun to tire of his new character of the repentant prodigal, had shown himself in a new light that evening, and was preparing to leave, to the relief of all parties. The prodigal, who no longer pretended to be penitent, had taken the conversation into his own hands at dinner. “I have had things my own way since I came here,” said Jack; “somehow it appears I have a great luck for having things my own way. It is you scrupulous people who think of others and of such antiquated stuff as duty, and so forth, that get yourselves into difficulties. My dear aunt, I am going away; if I were to remain an inmate of this house⁠—I mean to say, could I look forward to the privilege of continuing a member of this Christian family⁠—another day, I should know better how to conduct myself; but I am going back to my bad courses, aunt Dora; I am returning to the world⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh! Jack, my dear, I hope not,” said aunt Dora, who was much bewildered, and did not know what to say.</p>
			<p>“Too true,” said the relapsed sinner; “and considering all the lessons you have taught me, don’t you think it is the best thing I could do? There is my brother Frank, who has been carrying other people about on his shoulders, and doing his duty; but I don’t see that you good people are at all moved in his behalf. You leave him to fight his way by himself, and confer your benefits elsewhere, which is an odd sort of lesson for a worldling like me. As for Gerald, you know he’s a virtuous fool, as I have heard you all declare. There is nothing in the world that I can see to prevent him keeping his living and doing as he pleases, as most parsons do. However, that’s his own business. It is Frank’s case which is the edifying case to me. If my convictions of sin had gone just a step farther,” said the pitiless critic, “if I had devoted myself to bringing others to repentance, as is the first duty of a reformed sinner, my aunt Leonora would not have hesitated to give Skelmersdale to me⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Jack, hold your tongue,” said Miss Leonora; but though her cheeks burned, her voice was not so firm as usual, and she actually failed in putting down the man who had determined to have his say.</p>
			<p>“Fact, my dear aunt,” said Jack; “if I had been a greater rascal than I am, and gone a little farther, you and your people would have thought me quite fit for a cure of souls. I’d have come in for your good things that way as well as other ways; but here is Frank, who even I can see is a right sort of parson. I don’t pretend to fixed theological opinions,” said this unlooked-for oracle, with a comic glance aside at Gerald, the most unlikely person present to make any response; “but, so far as I can see, he’s a kind of fellow most men would be glad to make a friend of when they were under a cloud⁠—not that he was ever very civil to me. I tell you, so far from rewarding him for being of the true sort, you do nothing but snub him, that I can see. He looks to me as good for work as any man I know; but you’ll give your livings to any kind of wretched make-believe before you’ll give them to Frank. I am aware,” said the heir of the Wentworths, with a momentary flush, “that I have never been considered much of a credit to the family; but if I were to announce my intention of marrying and settling, there is not one of the name that would not lend a hand to smooth matters. That is the reward of wickedness,” said Jack, with a laugh; “as for Frank, he’s a perpetual curate, and may marry perhaps fifty years hence; that’s the way you good people treat a man who never did anything to be ashamed of in his life; and you expect me to give up my evil courses after such a lesson? I trust I am not such a fool,” said the relapsed prodigal. He sat looking at them all in his easy way, enjoying the confusion, the indignation, and wrath with which his address was received. “The man who gets his own way is the man who takes it,” he concluded, with his usual composure, pouring out Miss Leonora’s glass of claret as he spoke.</p>
			<p>Nobody had ever before seen the strong-minded woman in so much agitation. “Frank knows what my feelings are,” she said, abruptly. “I have a great respect for himself, but I have no confidence in his principles. I⁠—I have explained my ideas about Church patronage⁠—”</p>
			<p>But here the Squire broke in. “I always said, sir,” said the old man, with an unsteady voice, “that if I ever lived to see a thing or two amended that was undoubtedly objectionable, your brother Jack’s advice would be invaluable to the family as a⁠—as a man of the world. I have nothing to say against clergymen, sir,” continued the Squire, without it being apparent whom he was addressing, “but I have always expressed my conviction of⁠—of the value of your brother Jack’s advice as⁠—as a man of the world.”</p>
			<p>This speech had a wonderful effect upon the assembled family, but most of all upon the son thus commended, who lost all his ease and composure as his father spoke, and turned his head stiffly to one side, as if afraid to meet the Squire’s eyes, which indeed were not seeking his, but were fixed upon the table, as was natural, considering the state of emotion in which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was. As for Jack, when he had steadied himself a little, he got up from his seat and tried to laugh, though the effort was far from being a successful one.</p>
			<p>“Even my father applauds me, you see, because I am a scamp and don’t deserve it,” he said, with a voice which was partially choked. “Good-bye, sir; I am going away.”</p>
			<p>The Squire rose too, with the hazy bewildered look of which his other children were afraid.</p>
			<p>“Good-bye, sir,” said the old man, and then made a pause before he held out his hand. “You’ll not forget what I’ve said, Jack,” he added, with a little haste. “It’s true enough, though I haven’t that confidence in you that⁠—that I might have had. I am getting old, and I have had two attacks, sir,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, with dignity; “and anyhow, I can’t live for ever. Your brothers can make their own way in the world, but I haven’t saved all that I could have wished. When I am gone, Jack, be just to the girls and the little children,” said the Squire; and with that took his son’s hand and grasped it hard, and looked his heir full in the face.</p>
			<p>Jack Wentworth was not prepared for any such appeal; he was still less prepared to discover the unexpected and inevitable sequence with which one good sentiment leads to another. He quite faltered and broke down in this unlooked-for emergency. “Father,” he said unawares, for the first time for ten years, “if you wish it, I will join you in breaking the entail.”</p>
			<p>“No such thing, sir,” said the Squire, who, so far from being pleased, was irritated and disturbed by the proposal. “I ask you to do your duty, sir, and not to shirk it,” the head of the house said, with natural vehemence, as he stood with that circle of Wentworths round him, giving forth his code of honour to his unworthy heir.</p>
			<p>While his father was speaking, Jack recovered a little from his momentary <i xml:lang="fr">attendrissement</i>. “Good-bye, sir; I hope you’ll live a hundred years,” he said, wringing his father’s hand, “if you don’t last out half-a-dozen of me, as you ought to do. But I’d rather not anticipate such a change. In that case,” the prodigal went on with a certain huskiness in his voice, “I daresay I should not turn out so great a rascal as⁠—as I ought to do. To-day and yesterday it has even occurred to me by moments that I was your son, sir,” said Jack Wentworth; and then he made an abrupt stop and dropped the Squire’s hand, and came to himself in a surprising way. When he turned towards the rest of the family, he was in perfect possession of his usual courtesy and good spirits. He nodded to them all round⁠—with superb good-humour. “Good-bye, all of you; I wish you better luck, Frank, and not so much virtue. Perhaps you will have a better chance now the lost sheep has gone back to the wilderness. Good-bye to you all. I don’t think I’ve any other last words to say.” He lighted his cigar with his ordinary composure in the hall, and whistled one of his favourite airs as he went through the garden. “Oddly enough, however, our friend Wodehouse can beat me in that,” he said, with a smile, to Frank, who had followed him out, “perhaps in other things too, who knows? Good-bye, and good-luck, old fellow.” And thus the heir of the Wentworths disappeared into the darkness, which swallowed him up, and was seen no more.</p>
			<p>But naturally there was a good deal of commotion in the house. Miss Leonora, who never had known what it was to have nerves in the entire course of her existence, retired to her own room with a headache, to the entire consternation of the family. She had been a strong-minded woman all her life, and managed everybody’s affairs without being distracted and hampered in her career by those doubts of her own wisdom, and questions as to her own motives, which will now and then afflict the minds of weaker people when they have to decide for others. But this time an utterly novel and unexpected accident had befallen Miss Leonora; a man of no principles at all had delivered his opinion upon her conduct⁠—and so far from finding his criticism contemptible, or discovering in it the ordinary outcry of the wicked against the righteous, she had found it true, and by means of it had for perhaps the first time in her life seen herself as others saw her. Neither was the position in which she found herself one from which she could get extricated even by any daring arbitrary exertion of will, such as a woman in difficulties is sometimes capable of. To be sure, she might still have cut the knot in a summary feminine way; might have said “No” abruptly to Julia Trench and her curate, and, after all, have bestowed Skelmersdale, like any other prize or reward of virtue, upon her nephew Frank⁠—a step which Miss Dora Wentworth would have concluded upon at once without any hesitation. The elder sister, however, was gifted with a truer perception of affairs. Miss Leonora knew that there were some things which could be done, and yet could not be done⁠—a piece of knowledge difficult to a woman. She recognised the fact that she had committed herself, and got into a corner from which there was but one possible egress; and as she acknowledged this to herself, she saw at the same time that Julia Trench (for whom she had been used to entertain a good-humoured contempt as a clever sort of girl enough) had managed matters very cleverly, and that, instead of dispensing her piece of patronage like an optimist to the best, she had, in fact, given it up to the most skilful and persevering angler, as any other woman might have done. The blow was bitter, and Miss Leonora did not seek to hide it from herself, not to say that the unpleasant discovery was aggravated by having been thus pointed out by Jack, who in his own person had taken her in, and cheated his sensible aunt. She felt humbled, and wounded in the tenderest point, to think that her reprobate nephew had seen through her, but that she had not been able to see through him, and had been deceived by his professions of penitence. The more she turned it over in her mind, the more Miss Leonora’s head ached; for was it not growing apparent that she, who prided herself so much on her impartial judgment, had been moved, not by heroic and stoical justice and the love of souls, but a good deal by prejudice and a good deal by skilful artifice, and very little indeed by that highest motive which she called the glory of God? And it was Jack who had set all this before her clear as daylight. No wonder the excellent woman was disconcerted. She went to bed gloomily with her headache, and would tolerate no ministrations, neither of sal-volatile nor eau-de-Cologne, nor even of green tea. “It always does Miss Dora a power of good,” said the faithful domestic who made this last suggestion; but Miss Leonora answered only by turning the unlucky speaker out of the room, and locking the door against any fresh intrusion. Miss Dora’s innocent headaches were articles of a very different kind from this, which proceeded neither from the heart nor the digestion, but from the conscience, as Miss Leonora thought⁠—with, possibly, a little aid from the temper, though she was less conscious of that. It was indeed a long series of doubts and qualms, and much internal conflict, which resulted through the rapidly-maturing influences of mortification and humbled self-regard, in this ominous and awe-inspiring Headache which startled the entire assembled family, and added fresh importance to the general crisis of Wentworth affairs.</p>
			<p>“I should not wonder if it was the Wentworth complaint,” said Miss Dora, with a sob of fright, to the renewed and increased indignation of the Squire.</p>
			<p>“I have already told you that the Wentworth complaint never attacks females,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth said emphatically, glad to employ what sounded like a contemptuous title for the inferior sex.</p>
			<p>“Yes, oh yes; but then Leonora is not exactly what you would call⁠—a female,” said poor Miss Dora, from whom an emergency so unexpected had taken all her little wits.</p>
			<p>While the house was in such an agitated condition, it is not to be supposed that it could be very comfortable for the gentlemen when they came up-stairs to the drawing-room, and found domestic sovereignty overthrown by a headache which nobody could comprehend, and chaos reigning in Miss Leonora’s place. Naturally there was, for one of the party at least, a refuge sweet and close at hand, to which his thoughts had escaped already. Frank Wentworth did not hesitate to follow his thoughts. Against the long years when family bonds make up all that is happiest in life, there must always be reckoned those moments of agitation and revolution, during which the bosom of a family is the most unrestful and disturbing place in existence, from which it is well to have a personal refuge and means of escape. The Perpetual Curate gave himself a little shake, and drew a long breath, as he emerged from one green door in Grange Lane and betook himself to another. He shook himself clear of all the Wentworth perplexities, all the family difficulties and doubts, and betook himself into the paradise which was altogether his own, and where there were no conflicting interests or differences of opinion. He was in such a hurry to get there that he did not pay any attention to the general aspect of Grange Lane, or to the gossips who were gathered round Elsworthy’s door: all that belonged to a previous stage of existence. At present he was full of the grand discovery, boldly stated by his brother Jack⁠—“The man who gets his own way is the man who <em>takes</em> it.” It was not an elevated doctrine, or one that had hitherto commended itself specially to the mind of the Perpetual Curate; but he could not help thinking of his father’s pathetic reliance upon Jack’s advice as a man of the world, as he laid up in his mind the prodigal’s maxim, and felt, with a little thrill of excitement, that he was about to act on it; from which manner of stating the case <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s friends will perceive that self-will had seized upon him in the worst form; for he was not going boldly up to the new resolution with his eyes open, but had resigned himself to the tide, which was gradually rising in one united flux of love, pride, impatience, sophistry, and inclination; which he watched with a certain passive content, knowing that the stormy current would carry him away.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, however, reckoned without his host, as is now and then the case with most men, Perpetual Curates included. He walked into the other drawing-room, which was occupied only by two ladies, where the lamp was burning softly on the little table in the corner, and the windows, half open, admitted the fragrant air, the perfumed breath and stillness and faint inarticulate noises of the night. Since the visit of Wodehouse in the morning, which had driven Lucy into her first fit of passion, an indescribable change had come over the house, which had now returned to the possession of its former owners, and looked again like home. It was very quiet in the familiar room which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth knew so well, for it was only when excited by events “beyond their control,” as Miss Wodehouse said, that the sisters could forget what had happened so lately⁠—the loss which had made a revolution in their world. Miss Wodehouse, who for the first time in her life was busy, and had in hand a quantity of mysterious calculations and lists to make out, sat at the table in the centre of the room, with her desk open, and covered with long slips of paper. Perhaps it was to save her Rector the trouble that the gentle woman gave herself so much labour; perhaps she liked putting down on paper all the things that were indispensable for the new establishment. At all events, she looked up only to give <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth a smile and sisterly nod of welcome as he came in and made his way to the corner where Lucy sat, not unexpectant. Out of the disturbed atmosphere he had just left, the Perpetual Curate came softly into that familiar corner, feeling that he had suddenly reached his haven, and that Eden itself could not have possessed a sweeter peace. Lucy in her black dress, with traces of the exhaustion of nature in her face, which was the loveliest face in the world to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, looked up and welcomed him with that look of satisfaction and content which is the highest compliment one human creature can pay to another. His presence rounded off all the corners of existence to Lucy for that moment at least, and made the world complete and full. He sat down beside her at her work-table with no further interruption to the tête-à-tête than the presence of the kind elder sister at the table, who was absorbed in her lists, and who, even had that pleasant business been wanting, was dear and familiar enough to both to make her spectatorship just the sweet restraint which endears such intercourse all the more. Thus the Perpetual Curate seated himself, feeling in some degree master of the position; and surely here, if nowhere else in the world, the young man was justified in expecting to have his own way.</p>
			<p>“They have settled about their marriage,” said Lucy, whose voice was sufficiently audible to be heard at the table, where Miss Wodehouse seized her pen hastily and plunged it into the ink, doing her best to appear unconscious, but failing sadly in the attempt. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proctor is going away directly to make everything ready, and the marriage is to be on the 15th of next month.”</p>
			<p>“And ours?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, who had not as yet approached that subject. Lucy knew that this event must be far off, and was not agitated about it as yet; on the contrary, she met his look sympathetically and with deprecation after the first natural blush, and soothed him in her feminine way, patting softly with her pretty hand the sleeve of his coat.</p>
			<p>“Nobody knows,” said Lucy. “We must wait, and have patience. We have more time to spare than they have,” she added, with a little laugh. “We must wait.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t see the <em>must</em>,” said the Perpetual Curate. “I have been thinking it all over since the morning. I see no reason why I should always have to give in, and wait; self-sacrifice is well enough when it can’t be helped, but I don’t see any reason for postponing my happiness indefinitely. Look here, Lucy. It appears to me at present that there are only two classes of people in the world⁠—those who will wait, and those who won’t. I don’t mean to enrol myself among the martyrs. The man who gets his own way is the man who takes it. I don’t see any reason in the world for concluding that I <em>must</em> wait.”</p>
			<p>Lucy Wodehouse was a very good young woman, a devoted Anglican, and loyal to all her duties; but she had always been known to possess a spark of spirit, and this rebellious quality came to a sudden blaze at so unlooked-for a speech. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth,” said Lucy, looking the Curate in the face with a look which was equivalent to making him a low curtsy, “I understood there were two people to be consulted as to the must or must not;” and having entered this protest, she withdrew her chair a little farther off, and bestowed her attention absolutely upon the piece of needlework in her hand.</p>
			<p>If the ground had suddenly been cut away underneath Frank Wentworth’s feet, he could not have been more surprised; for, to tell the truth, it had not occurred to him to doubt that he himself was the final authority on this point, though, to be sure, it was part of the conventional etiquette that the lady should “fix the day.” He sat gazing at her with so much surprise that for a minute or two he could say nothing. “Lucy, I am not going to have you put yourself on the other side,” he said at last; “there is not to be any opposition between you and me.”</p>
			<p>“That is as it may be,” said Lucy, who was not mollified. “You seem to have changed your sentiments altogether since the morning, and there is no change in the circumstances, at least that I can see.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, there is a great change,” said the young man. “If I could have sacrificed myself in earnest and said nothing⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Which you were quite free to do,” interrupted Lucy, who, having given way to temper once to-day, found in herself an alarming proclivity towards a repetition of the offence.</p>
			<p>“Which I was quite free to do,” said the Perpetual Curate, with a smile, “but could not, and did not, all the same. Things are altogether changed. Now, be as cross as you please, you belong to me, <i xml:lang="it">Lucia mia</i>. To be sure, I have no money⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I was not thinking of that,” said the young lady, under her breath.</p>
			<p>“Of course one has to think about it,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth; “but the question is, whether we shall be happier and better going on separate in our usual way, or making up our minds to give up something for the comfort of being together. Perhaps you will forgive me for taking <em>that</em> view of the question,” said the Curate, with a little enthusiasm. “I have got tired of ascetic principles. I don’t see why it must be best to deny myself and postpone myself to other things and other people. I begin to be of my brother Jack’s opinion. The children of this world are wiser in their generation than the children of light. A man who will wait has to wait. Providence does not invariably reward him after he has been tried, as we used to suppose. I am willing to be a poor man because I can’t help it; but I am not willing to wait and trust my happiness to the future when it is in my reach now,” said the unreasonable young man, to whom it was of course as easy as it was to Lucy to change the position of his chair, and prevent the distance between them being increased. Perhaps he might have carried his point even at that moment, had not Miss Wodehouse, who had heard enough to alarm her, come forward hastily in a fright on the prudential side.</p>
			<p>“I could not help hearing what you were saying,” said the elder sister. “Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, I hope you don’t mean to say that you can’t trust Providence? I am sure that is not Lucy’s way of thinking. I would not mind, and I am sure she would not mind, beginning very quietly; but then you have nothing, next to nothing, neither of you. It might not matter, just at the first,” said Miss Wodehouse, with serious looks; “but then⁠—afterwards, you know,” and a vision of a nursery flashed upon her mind as she spoke. “Clergymen always have such large families,” she said half out before she was aware, and stopped, covered with confusion, not daring to look at Lucy to see what effect such a suggestion might have had upon her. “I mean,” cried Miss Wodehouse, hurrying on to cover over her inadvertence if possible, “I have seen such cases; and a poor clergyman who has to think of the grocer’s bill and the baker’s bill instead of his parish and his duty⁠—there are some things you young people know a great deal better than I do, but you don’t know how dreadful it is to see that.”</p>
			<p>Here Lucy, on her part, was touched on a tender point, and interposed. “For a man to be teased about bills,” said the young housekeeper, with flushed cheeks and an averted countenance, “it must be not his poverty, but his⁠—his wife’s fault.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Lucy, don’t say so,” cried Miss Wodehouse; “what is a poor woman to do, especially when she has no money of her own, as you wouldn’t have? and then the struggling, and getting old before your time, and all the burdens⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Please don’t say any more,” said Lucy; “there was no intention on⁠—on any side to drive things to a decision. As for me, I have not a high opinion of myself. I would not be the means of diminishing anyone’s comforts,” said the spiteful young woman. “How can I be sure that I might not turn out a very poor compensation? We settled this morning how all that was to be, and I for one have not changed my mind⁠—as yet,” said Lucy. That was all the encouragement <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth got when he propounded his new views. Things looked easy enough when he was alone, and suffered himself to drift on pleasantly on the changed and heightened current of personal desires and wishes; but it became apparent to him, after that evening’s discussion, that even in Eden itself, though the dew had not yet dried on the leaves, it would be highly incautious for any man to conclude that he was sure of having his own way. The Perpetual Curate returned a sadder and more doubtful man to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s, to his own apartments; possibly, as the two states of mind so often go together, a wiser individual too.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
