<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
			<p>The Curate went to breakfast next morning with a little curiosity and a great deal of painful feeling. He had been inhospitable to his brother, and a revulsion had happened such as happens invariably when a generous man is forced by external circumstances to show himself churlish. Though his good sense and his pride alike prevented him from changing his resolution of the previous night, still his heart had relented toward Jack, and he felt sorry and half ashamed to meet the brother to whom he had shown so much temper and so little kindness. It was much later than usual when he came down-stairs, and Jack was just coming out of the comfortable chamber which belonged of right to his brother, when the Curate entered the sitting-room. Jack was in his dressing-gown, as on the previous night, and came forth humming an air out of the ‘Trovatore,’ and looking as wholesomely fresh and clean and dainty as the most honest gentleman in England. He gave his brother a good-humoured nod, and wished him good morning. “I am glad to see you don’t keep distressingly early hours,” he said, between the bars of the air he was humming. He was a man of perfect digestion, like all the Wentworths, and got up accordingly, in a good temper, not disposed to make too much of any little incivility that might have taken place. On the contrary, he helped himself to his brother’s favourite omelet with the most engaging cheerfulness, and entered into such conversation as might be supposed to suit a Perpetual Curate in a little country town.</p>
			<p>“I daresay you have a good many nice people about here,” said Jack. “I’ve done nothing but walk about since I came⁠—and it does a man good to see those fresh little women with their pink cheeks. There’s one, a sister of our friend’s, I believe,” he continued, with a nod towards the door to indicate Wodehouse⁠—“an uncommonly pretty girl, I can tell you; and there’s a little rosebud of a creature at that shop, whom, they tell me, you’re interested in. Your living is not worth much, I suppose? It’s unlucky having two clergymen in a family; but, to be sure, you’re going in for Skelmersdale. By the way, that reminds me⁠—how are the aunts? I have not heard anything of them for ages. Female relations of that description generally cling to the parsons of the race. I suppose they are all living⁠—all three? Some people never seem to die.”</p>
			<p>“They are here,” said the Curate, succinctly, “living in Carlingford. I wonder nobody has told you.”</p>
			<p>A sudden bright spark lighted in the prodigal’s eyes. “Ah, they are here, are they?” he said, after a momentary pause; “so much the better for you; but in justice you ought to be content with the living. I say so as your elder brother. Gerald has the best right to what they’ve got to leave. By the by, how are Gerald and the rest? you’ve just been there. I suppose our respected parent goes on multiplying. To think of so many odious little wretches calling themselves Wentworth is enough to make one disgusted with the name.”</p>
			<p>“My father was very ill when I left; he has had another attack,” said the Curate. “He does not seem able to bear any agitation. Your telegram upset him altogether. I don’t know what you’ve been about⁠—he did not tell me,” continued the younger brother, with a little emotion, “but he is very uneasy about you.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, I daresay,” said Jack; “that’s natural; but he’s wonderfully tough for such an old fellow. I should say it would take twenty attacks to finish him; and this is the second, isn’t it? I wonder how long an interval there was between the two; it would be a pretty calculation for a <i>post-obit</i>. Wodehouse seems to have brought his ancestor down at the first shot almost; but then there’s no entail in his case, and the old fellow may have made a will. I beg your pardon; you don’t like this sort of talk. I forgot you were a clergyman. I rather like this town of yours, do you know. Sweet situation, and good for the health, I should say. I’ll take your advice, I think, about the⁠—how did you call it?⁠—Black Boar. Unless, indeed, some charitable family would take me in,” said the elder brother, with a glance from under his eyelids. His real meaning did not in the least degree suggest itself to the Curate, who was thinking more of what was past than of what was to come.</p>
			<p>“You seem to take a great interest in Wodehouse?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth.</p>
			<p>“Yes; and so do you,” said Jack, with a keen glance of curiosity⁠—“I can’t tell why. My interest in him is easily explained. If the affair came to a trial, it might involve other people who are of retiring dispositions and dislike publicity. I don’t mind saying,” continued the heir of the Wentworths, laying down his knife and fork, and looking across at his brother with smiling candour, “that I might myself be brought before the world in a way which would wound my modesty; so it must not be permitted to go any further, you perceive. The partner has got a warrant out, but has not put it into execution as yet. That’s why I sent for you. You are the only man, so far as I can see, that can be of any use.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know what you mean,” said the Curate, hastily, “nor what connection you can possibly have with Wodehouse; perhaps it is better not to inquire. I mean to do my best for him, independent of you.”</p>
			<p>“Do,” said Jack Wentworth, with a slight yawn; “it is much better not to inquire. A clergyman runs the risk of hearing things that may shock him when he enters into worldly business; but the position of mediator is thoroughly professional. Now for the Black Boar. I’ll send for my traps when I get settled,” he said, rising in his languid way. He had made a very good breakfast, and he was not at all disposed to make himself uncomfortable by quarrelling with his brother. Besides, he had a new idea in his mind. So he gave the Curate another little good-humoured nod, and disappeared into the sleeping-room, from which he emerged a few minutes after with a coat replacing the dressing-gown, ready to go out. “I daresay I shall see you again before I leave Carlingford,” he said, and left the room with the utmost suavity. As for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, it is probable that his brother’s serenity had quite the reverse of a soothing effect upon his mind and temper. He rose from the table as soon as Jack was gone, and for a long time paced about the room composing himself, and planning what he was to do⁠—so long, indeed, that Sarah, after coming up softly to inspect, had cleared the table and put everything straight in the room before the Curate discovered her presence. It was only when she came up to him at last, with her little rustical curtsy, to say that, please, her missis would like to see him for a moment in the parlour, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth found out that she was there. This interruption roused him out of his manifold and complicated thoughts. “I am too busy just now, but I will see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin to-night,” he said; “and you can tell her that my brother has gone to get rooms at the Blue Boar.” After he had thus satisfied the sympathetic handmaiden, the Curate crossed over to the closed door of Wodehouse’s room and knocked. The inmate there was still in bed, as was his custom, and answered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth through his beard in a recumbent voice, less sulky and more uncertain than on the previous night. Poor Wodehouse had neither the nerve nor the digestion of his more splendid associate. He had no strength of evil in himself when he was out of the way of it; and the consequence of a restless night was a natural amount of penitence and shame in the morning. He met the Curate with a depressed countenance, and answered all his questions readily enough, even giving him the particulars of the forged bills, in respect to which Thomas Wodehouse the younger could not, somehow, feel so guilty as if it had been a name different from his own which he had affixed to those fatal bits of paper; and he did not hesitate much to promise that he would go abroad and try to make a new beginning if this matter could be settled. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth went out with some satisfaction after the interview, believing in his heart that his own remonstrances had had their due effect, as it is so natural to believe⁠—for he did not know, having slept very soundly, that it had rained a good deal during the night, and that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hadwin’s biggest tub (for the old lady had a passion for rain-water) was immediately under poor Wodehouse’s window, and kept him awake as it filled and ran over all through the summer darkness. The recollection of Jack Wentworth, even in his hour of success, was insufficient to fortify the simple soul of his humble admirer against that ominous sound of the unseen rain, and against the flashes of sudden lightning that seemed to blaze into his heart. He could not help thinking of his father’s sick-bed in those midnight hours, and of all the melancholy array of lost years which had made him no longer “a gentleman, as he used to be,” but a skulking vagabond in his native place; and his penitence lasted till after he had had his breakfast and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth was gone. Then perhaps the other side of the question recurred to his mind, and he began to think that if his father died there might be no need for his banishment; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth knew nothing of this change in his <i>protégé’s</i> sentiments, as he went quickly up Grange Lane. Wharfside and all the district had lain neglected for three long days, as the Curate was aware, and he had promised to call at <abbr>No.</abbr> 10 Prickett’s Lane, and to look after the little orphan children whom Lucy had taken charge of. His occupations, in short, both public and private, were overpowering, and he could not tell how he was to get through them; for, in addition to everything else, it was Friday, and there was a litany service at twelve o’clock at <abbr>St.</abbr> Roque’s. So the young priest had little time to lose as he hurried up once again to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s green door.</p>
			<p>It was Miss Wodehouse who came to meet the Curate as soon as his presence was known in the house⁠—Miss Wodehouse, and not Lucy, who made way for her sister to pass her, and took no notice of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth’s name. The elder sister entered very hurriedly the little parlour down-stairs, and shut the door fast, and came up to him with an anxious inquiring face. She told him her father was just the same, in faltering tones. “And oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, has anything happened?” she exclaimed, with endless unspeakable questions in her eyes. It was so hard for the gentle woman to keep her secret⁠—the very sight of somebody who knew it was a relief to her heart.</p>
			<p>“I want you to give me full authority to act for you,” said the Curate. “I must go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wodehouse’s partner and discuss the whole matter.”</p>
			<p>Here Miss Wodehouse gave a little cry, and stopped him suddenly. “Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, it would kill papa to know you had spoken to any one. You must send him away,” she said, breathless with anxiety and terror. “To think of discussing it with any one when even Lucy does not know⁠—!” She spoke with so much haste and fright that it was scarcely possible to make out her last words.</p>
			<p>“Nevertheless I must speak to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waters,” said the Curate; “I am going there now. He knows all about it already, and has a warrant for <i>his</i> apprehension; but we must stop that. I will undertake that it shall be paid, and you must give me full authority to act for you.” When Miss Wodehouse met the steady look he gave her, she veered immediately from her fright at the thought of having it spoken of, to gratitude to him who was thus ready to take her burden into his hands.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, it is so good of you⁠—it is like a brother!” said the trembling woman; and then she made a pause. “I say a brother,” she said, drawing an involuntary moral, “though we have never had any good of ours; and oh, if Lucy only knew⁠—!”</p>
			<p>The Curate turned away hastily, and wrung her hand without being aware of it. “No,” he said, with a touch of bitterness, “don’t let her know. I don’t want to appeal to her gratitude;” and with that he became silent, and fell to listening, standing in the middle of the room, if perhaps he might catch any sound of footsteps coming down-stairs.</p>
			<p>“She will know better some day,” said Miss Wodehouse, wiping her eyes; “and oh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wentworth, if papa ever gets better⁠—!” Here the poor lady broke down into inarticulate weeping. “But I know you will stand by us,” she said, amid her tears; “it is all the comfort I have⁠—and Lucy⁠—”</p>
			<p>There was no sound of any footstep on the stair⁠—nothing but the ticking of the timepiece on the mantelshelf, and the rustling of the curtains in the soft morning breeze which came through the open window, and Miss Wodehouse’s crying. The Curate had not expected to see Lucy, and knew in his heart that it was better they should not meet just at this moment; but, notwithstanding this, it was strange how bitter and disappointed he felt, and what an impatient longing he had for one look of her, even though it should be a look which would drive him frantic with mortified love and disappointed expectation. To know that she was under the same roof, and that she knew he was here, but kept away, and did not care to see him, was gall to his excited mind. He went away hastily, pressing poor Miss Wodehouse’s hand with a kind of silent rage. “Don’t talk about Lucy,” he said, half to himself, his heart swelling and throbbing at the sound of the name. It was the first time he had spoken it aloud to any ear but his own, and he left the house tingling with an indignation and mortification and bitter fondness which could not be expressed in words. What he was about to do was for her sake, and he thought to himself, with a forlorn pride, that she would never know it, and it did not matter. He could not tell that Lucy was glancing out furtively over the blind, ashamed of herself in her wounded heart for doing so, and wondering whether even now he was occupied with that unworthy love which had made an everlasting separation between them. If it had been any one worthy, it would have been different, poor Lucy thought, as she pressed back the tears into her eyes, and looked out wistfully at him over the blind. She above-stairs in the sick-room, and he in the fresh garden hastening out to his work, were both thinking in their hearts how perverse life was, and how hard it was not to be happy⁠—as indeed they well might in a general way; though perhaps one glance of the Curate’s eyes upward, one meeting of looks, might have resulted quite reasonably in a more felicitous train of thinking, at least for that day.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
